Project Gutenberg's Jungle Tales of Tarzan, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Jungle Tales of Tarzan

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Release Date: June 5, 2008 [EBook #106]
[Last updated: July 4, 2012]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUNGLE TALES OF TARZAN ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.








Jungle Tales of Tarzan


by

Edgar Rice Burroughs



Contents

CHAPTER

  1  Tarzan's First Love
  2  The Capture of Tarzan
  3  The Fight for the Balu
  4  The God of Tarzan
  5  Tarzan and the Black Boy
  6  The Witch-Doctor Seeks Vengeance
  7  The End of Bukawai
  8  The Lion
  9  The Nightmare
 10  The Battle for Teeka
 11  A Jungle Joke
 12  Tarzan Rescues the Moon




                           1

                  Tarzan's First Love

TEEKA, STRETCHED AT luxurious ease in the shade of the tropical forest,
presented, unquestionably, a most alluring picture of young, feminine
loveliness.  Or at least so thought Tarzan of the Apes, who squatted
upon a low-swinging branch in a near-by tree and looked down upon her.

Just to have seen him there, lolling upon the swaying bough of the
jungle-forest giant, his brown skin mottled by the brilliant equatorial
sunlight which percolated through the leafy canopy of green above him,
his clean-limbed body relaxed in graceful ease, his shapely head partly
turned in contemplative absorption and his intelligent, gray eyes
dreamily devouring the object of their devotion, you would have thought
him the reincarnation of some demigod of old.

You would not have guessed that in infancy he had suckled at the breast
of a hideous, hairy she-ape, nor that in all his conscious past since
his parents had passed away in the little cabin by the landlocked
harbor at the jungle's verge, he had known no other associates than the
sullen bulls and the snarling cows of the tribe of Kerchak, the great
ape.

Nor, could you have read the thoughts which passed through that active,
healthy brain, the longings and desires and aspirations which the sight
of Teeka inspired, would you have been any more inclined to give
credence to the reality of the origin of the ape-man. For, from his
thoughts alone, you could never have gleaned the truth--that he had
been born to a gentle English lady or that his sire had been an English
nobleman of time-honored lineage.

Lost to Tarzan of the Apes was the truth of his origin.  That he was
John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, with a seat in the House of Lords, he did
not know, nor, knowing, would have understood.

Yes, Teeka was indeed beautiful!

Of course Kala had been beautiful--one's mother is always that--but
Teeka was beautiful in a way all her own, an indescribable sort of way
which Tarzan was just beginning to sense in a rather vague and hazy
manner.

For years had Tarzan and Teeka been play-fellows, and Teeka still
continued to be playful while the young bulls of her own age were
rapidly becoming surly and morose.  Tarzan, if he gave the matter much
thought at all, probably reasoned that his growing attachment for the
young female could be easily accounted for by the fact that of the
former playmates she and he alone retained any desire to frolic as of
old.

But today, as he sat gazing upon her, he found himself noting the
beauties of Teeka's form and features--something he never had done
before, since none of them had aught to do with Teeka's ability to race
nimbly through the lower terraces of the forest in the primitive games
of tag and hide-and-go-seek which Tarzan's fertile brain evolved.
Tarzan scratched his head, running his fingers deep into the shock of
black hair which framed his shapely, boyish face--he scratched his head
and sighed.  Teeka's new-found beauty became as suddenly his despair.
He envied her the handsome coat of hair which covered her body.  His
own smooth, brown hide he hated with a hatred born of disgust and
contempt.  Years back he had harbored a hope that some day he, too,
would be clothed in hair as were all his brothers and sisters; but of
late he had been forced to abandon the delectable dream.

Then there were Teeka's great teeth, not so large as the males, of
course, but still mighty, handsome things by comparison with Tarzan's
feeble white ones.  And her beetling brows, and broad, flat nose, and
her mouth! Tarzan had often practiced making his mouth into a little
round circle and then puffing out his cheeks while he winked his eyes
rapidly; but he felt that he could never do it in the same cute and
irresistible way in which Teeka did it.

And as he watched her that afternoon, and wondered, a young bull ape
who had been lazily foraging for food beneath the damp, matted carpet
of decaying vegetation at the roots of a near-by tree lumbered
awkwardly in Teeka's direction.  The other apes of the tribe of Kerchak
moved listlessly about or lolled restfully in the midday heat of the
equatorial jungle.  From time to time one or another of them had passed
close to Teeka, and Tarzan had been uninterested.  Why was it then that
his brows contracted and his muscles tensed as he saw Taug pause beside
the young she and then squat down close to her?

Tarzan always had liked Taug.  Since childhood they had romped
together.  Side by side they had squatted near the water, their quick,
strong fingers ready to leap forth and seize Pisah, the fish, should
that wary denizen of the cool depths dart surfaceward to the lure of
the insects Tarzan tossed upon the face of the pool.

Together they had baited Tublat and teased Numa, the lion.  Why, then,
should Tarzan feel the rise of the short hairs at the nape of his neck
merely because Taug sat close to Teeka?

It is true that Taug was no longer the frolicsome ape of yesterday.
When his snarling-muscles bared his giant fangs no one could longer
imagine that Taug was in as playful a mood as when he and Tarzan had
rolled upon the turf in mimic battle.  The Taug of today was a huge,
sullen bull ape, somber and forbidding.  Yet he and Tarzan never had
quarreled.

For a few minutes the young ape-man watched Taug press closer to Teeka.
He saw the rough caress of the huge paw as it stroked the sleek
shoulder of the she, and then Tarzan of the Apes slipped catlike to the
ground and approached the two.

As he came his upper lip curled into a snarl, exposing his fighting
fangs, and a deep growl rumbled from his cavernous chest.  Taug looked
up, batting his blood-shot eyes.  Teeka half raised herself and looked
at Tarzan.  Did she guess the cause of his perturbation? Who may say?
At any rate, she was feminine, and so she reached up and scratched Taug
behind one of his small, flat ears.

Tarzan saw, and in the instant that he saw, Teeka was no longer the
little playmate of an hour ago; instead she was a wondrous thing--the
most wondrous in the world--and a possession for which Tarzan would
fight to the death against Taug or any other who dared question his
right of proprietorship.

Stooped, his muscles rigid and one great shoulder turned toward the
young bull, Tarzan of the Apes sidled nearer and nearer.  His face was
partly averted, but his keen gray eyes never left those of Taug, and as
he came, his growls increased in depth and volume.

Taug rose upon his short legs, bristling.  His fighting fangs were
bared.  He, too, sidled, stiff-legged, and growled.

"Teeka is Tarzan's," said the ape-man, in the low gutturals of the
great anthropoids.

"Teeka is Taug's," replied the bull ape.

Thaka and Numgo and Gunto, disturbed by the growlings of the two young
bulls, looked up half apathetic, half interested.  They were sleepy,
but they sensed a fight.  It would break the monotony of the humdrum
jungle life they led.

Coiled about his shoulders was Tarzan's long grass rope, in his hand
was the hunting knife of the long-dead father he had never known.  In
Taug's little brain lay a great respect for the shiny bit of sharp
metal which the ape-boy knew so well how to use.  With it had he slain
Tublat, his fierce foster father, and Bolgani, the gorilla.  Taug knew
these things, and so he came warily, circling about Tarzan in search of
an opening.  The latter, made cautious because of his lesser bulk and
the inferiority of his natural armament, followed similar tactics.

For a time it seemed that the altercation would follow the way of the
majority of such differences between members of the tribe and that one
of them would finally lose interest and wander off to prosecute some
other line of endeavor.  Such might have been the end of it had the
CASUS BELLI been other than it was; but Teeka was flattered at the
attention that was being drawn to her and by the fact that these two
young bulls were contemplating battle on her account.  Such a thing
never before had occurred in Teeka's brief life.  She had seen other
bulls battling for other and older shes, and in the depth of her wild
little heart she had longed for the day when the jungle grasses would
be reddened with the blood of mortal combat for her fair sake.

So now she squatted upon her haunches and insulted both her admirers
impartially.  She hurled taunts at them for their cowardice, and called
them vile names, such as Histah, the snake, and Dango, the hyena.  She
threatened to call Mumga to chastise them with a stick--Mumga, who was
so old that she could no longer climb and so toothless that she was
forced to confine her diet almost exclusively to bananas and grub-worms.

The apes who were watching heard and laughed.  Taug was infuriated.  He
made a sudden lunge for Tarzan, but the ape-boy leaped nimbly to one
side, eluding him, and with the quickness of a cat wheeled and leaped
back again to close quarters.  His hunting knife was raised above his
head as he came in, and he aimed a vicious blow at Taug's neck.  The
ape wheeled to dodge the weapon so that the keen blade struck him but a
glancing blow upon the shoulder.

The spurt of red blood brought a shrill cry of delight from Teeka.  Ah,
but this was something worth while!  She glanced about to see if others
had witnessed this evidence of her popularity.  Helen of Troy was never
one whit more proud than was Teeka at that moment.

If Teeka had not been so absorbed in her own vaingloriousness she might
have noted the rustling of leaves in the tree above her--a rustling
which was not caused by any movement of the wind, since there was no
wind.  And had she looked up she might have seen a sleek body crouching
almost directly over her and wicked yellow eyes glaring hungrily down
upon her, but Teeka did not look up.

With his wound Taug had backed off growling horribly.  Tarzan had
followed him, screaming insults at him, and menacing him with his
brandishing blade.  Teeka moved from beneath the tree in an effort to
keep close to the duelists.

The branch above Teeka bent and swayed a trifle with the movement of
the body of the watcher stretched along it.  Taug had halted now and
was preparing to make a new stand.  His lips were flecked with foam,
and saliva drooled from his jowls.  He stood with head lowered and arms
outstretched, preparing for a sudden charge to close quarters.  Could
he but lay his mighty hands upon that soft, brown skin the battle would
be his.  Taug considered Tarzan's manner of fighting unfair.  He would
not close.  Instead, he leaped nimbly just beyond the reach of Taug's
muscular fingers.

The ape-boy had as yet never come to a real trial of strength with a
bull ape, other than in play, and so he was not at all sure that it
would be safe to put his muscles to the test in a life and death
struggle.  Not that he was afraid, for Tarzan knew nothing of fear.
The instinct of self-preservation gave him caution--that was all.  He
took risks only when it seemed necessary, and then he would hesitate at
nothing.

His own method of fighting seemed best fitted to his build and to his
armament.  His teeth, while strong and sharp, were, as weapons of
offense, pitifully inadequate by comparison with the mighty fighting
fangs of the anthropoids.  By dancing about, just out of reach of an
antagonist, Tarzan could do infinite injury with his long, sharp
hunting knife, and at the same time escape many of the painful and
dangerous wounds which would be sure to follow his falling into the
clutches of a bull ape.

And so Taug charged and bellowed like a bull, and Tarzan of the Apes
danced lightly to this side and that, hurling jungle billingsgate at
his foe, the while he nicked him now and again with his knife.

There were lulls in the fighting when the two would stand panting for
breath, facing each other, mustering their wits and their forces for a
new onslaught.  It was during a pause such as this that Taug chanced to
let his eyes rove beyond his foeman.  Instantly the entire aspect of
the ape altered.  Rage left his countenance to be supplanted by an
expression of fear.

With a cry that every ape there recognized, Taug turned and fled.  No
need to question him--his warning proclaimed the near presence of their
ancient enemy.

Tarzan started to seek safety, as did the other members of the tribe,
and as he did so he heard a panther's scream mingled with the
frightened cry of a she-ape.  Taug heard, too; but he did not pause in
his flight.

With the ape-boy, however, it was different.  He looked back to see if
any member of the tribe was close pressed by the beast of prey, and the
sight that met his eyes filled them with an expression of horror.

Teeka it was who cried out in terror as she fled across a little
clearing toward the trees upon the opposite side, for after her leaped
Sheeta, the panther, in easy, graceful bounds.  Sheeta appeared to be
in no hurry.  His meat was assured, since even though the ape reached
the trees ahead of him she could not climb beyond his clutches before
he could be upon her.

Tarzan saw that Teeka must die.  He cried to Taug and the other bulls
to hasten to Teeka's assistance, and at the same time he ran toward the
pursuing beast, taking down his rope as he came.  Tarzan knew that once
the great bulls were aroused none of the jungle, not even Numa, the
lion, was anxious to measure fangs with them, and that if all those of
the tribe who chanced to be present today would charge, Sheeta, the
great cat, would doubtless turn tail and run for his life.

Taug heard, as did the others, but no one came to Tarzan's assistance
or Teeka's rescue, and Sheeta was rapidly closing up the distance
between himself and his prey.

The ape-boy, leaping after the panther, cried aloud to the beast in an
effort to turn it from Teeka or otherwise distract its attention until
the she-ape could gain the safety of the higher branches where Sheeta
dared not go.  He called the panther every opprobrious name that fell
to his tongue.  He dared him to stop and do battle with him; but Sheeta
only loped on after the luscious titbit now almost within his reach.

Tarzan was not far behind and he was gaining, but the distance was so
short that he scarce hoped to overhaul the carnivore before it had
felled Teeka.  In his right hand the boy swung his grass rope above his
head as he ran.  He hated to chance a miss, for the distance was much
greater than he ever had cast before except in practice.  It was the
full length of his grass rope which separated him from Sheeta, and yet
there was no other thing to do.  He could not reach the brute's side
before it overhauled Teeka.  He must chance a throw.

And just as Teeka sprang for the lower limb of a great tree, and Sheeta
rose behind her in a long, sinuous leap, the coils of the ape-boy's
grass rope shot swiftly through the air, straightening into a long thin
line as the open noose hovered for an instant above the savage head and
the snarling jaws.  Then it settled--clean and true about the tawny
neck it settled, and Tarzan, with a quick twist of his rope-hand, drew
the noose taut, bracing himself for the shock when Sheeta should have
taken up the slack.

Just short of Teeka's glossy rump the cruel talons raked the air as the
rope tightened and Sheeta was brought to a sudden stop--a stop that
snapped the big beast over upon his back.  Instantly Sheeta was
up--with glaring eyes, and lashing tail, and gaping jaws, from which
issued hideous cries of rage and disappointment.

He saw the ape-boy, the cause of his discomfiture, scarce forty feet
before him, and Sheeta charged.

Teeka was safe now; Tarzan saw to that by a quick glance into the tree
whose safety she had gained not an instant too soon, and Sheeta was
charging.  It was useless to risk his life in idle and unequal combat
from which no good could come; but could he escape a battle with the
enraged cat? And if he was forced to fight, what chance had he to
survive? Tarzan was constrained to admit that his position was aught
but a desirable one.  The trees were too far to hope to reach in time
to elude the cat.  Tarzan could but stand facing that hideous charge.
In his right hand he grasped his hunting knife--a puny, futile thing
indeed by comparison with the great rows of mighty teeth which lined
Sheeta's powerful jaws, and the sharp talons encased within his padded
paws; yet the young Lord Greystoke faced it with the same courageous
resignation with which some fearless ancestor went down to defeat and
death on Senlac Hill by Hastings.

From safety points in the trees the great apes watched, screaming
hatred at Sheeta and advice at Tarzan, for the progenitors of man have,
naturally, many human traits.  Teeka was frightened.  She screamed at
the bulls to hasten to Tarzan's assistance; but the bulls were
otherwise engaged--principally in giving advice and making faces.
Anyway, Tarzan was not a real Mangani, so why should they risk their
lives in an effort to protect him?

And now Sheeta was almost upon the lithe, naked body, and--the body was
not there.  Quick as was the great cat, the ape-boy was quicker.  He
leaped to one side almost as the panther's talons were closing upon
him, and as Sheeta went hurtling to the ground beyond, Tarzan was
racing for the safety of the nearest tree.

The panther recovered himself almost immediately and, wheeling, tore
after his prey, the ape-boy's rope dragging along the ground behind
him.  In doubling back after Tarzan, Sheeta had passed around a low
bush.  It was a mere nothing in the path of any jungle creature of the
size and weight of Sheeta--provided it had no trailing rope dangling
behind.  But Sheeta was handicapped by such a rope, and as he leaped
once again after Tarzan of the Apes the rope encircled the small bush,
became tangled in it and brought the panther to a sudden stop.  An
instant later Tarzan was safe among the higher branches of a small tree
into which Sheeta could not follow him.

Here he perched, hurling twigs and epithets at the raging feline
beneath him.  The other members of the tribe now took up the
bombardment, using such hard-shelled fruits and dead branches as came
within their reach, until Sheeta, goaded to frenzy and snapping at the
grass rope, finally succeeded in severing its strands.  For a moment
the panther stood glaring first at one of his tormentors and then at
another, until, with a final scream of rage, he turned and slunk off
into the tangled mazes of the jungle.

A half hour later the tribe was again upon the ground, feeding as
though naught had occurred to interrupt the somber dullness of their
lives.  Tarzan had recovered the greater part of his rope and was busy
fashioning a new noose, while Teeka squatted close behind him, in
evident token that her choice was made.

Taug eyed them sullenly.  Once when he came close, Teeka bared her
fangs and growled at him, and Tarzan showed his canines in an ugly
snarl; but Taug did not provoke a quarrel.  He seemed to accept after
the manner of his kind the decision of the she as an indication that he
had been vanquished in his battle for her favors.

Later in the day, his rope repaired, Tarzan took to the trees in search
of game.  More than his fellows he required meat, and so, while they
were satisfied with fruits and herbs and beetles, which could be
discovered without much effort upon their part, Tarzan spent
considerable time hunting the game animals whose flesh alone satisfied
the cravings of his stomach and furnished sustenance and strength to
the mighty thews which, day by day, were building beneath the soft,
smooth texture of his brown hide.

Taug saw him depart, and then, quite casually, the big beast hunted
closer and closer to Teeka in his search for food.  At last he was
within a few feet of her, and when he shot a covert glance at her he
saw that she was appraising him and that there was no evidence of anger
upon her face.

Taug expanded his great chest and rolled about on his short legs,
making strange growlings in his throat.  He raised his lips, baring his
fangs.  My, but what great, beautiful fangs he had! Teeka could not but
notice them.  She also let her eyes rest in admiration upon Taug's
beetling brows and his short, powerful neck.  What a beautiful creature
he was indeed!

Taug, flattered by the unconcealed admiration in her eyes, strutted
about, as proud and as vain as a peacock.  Presently he began to
inventory his assets, mentally, and shortly he found himself comparing
them with those of his rival.

Taug grunted, for there was no comparison.  How could one compare his
beautiful coat with the smooth and naked hideousness of Tarzan's bare
hide? Who could see beauty in the stingy nose of the Tarmangani after
looking at Taug's broad nostrils? And Tarzan's eyes! Hideous things,
showing white about them, and entirely unrimmed with red.  Taug knew
that his own blood-shot eyes were beautiful, for he had seen them
reflected in the glassy surface of many a drinking pool.

The bull drew nearer to Teeka, finally squatting close against her.
When Tarzan returned from his hunting a short time later it was to see
Teeka contentedly scratching the back of his rival.

Tarzan was disgusted.  Neither Taug nor Teeka saw him as he swung
through the trees into the glade.  He paused a moment, looking at them;
then, with a sorrowful grimace, he turned and faded away into the
labyrinth of leafy boughs and festooned moss out of which he had come.

Tarzan wished to be as far away from the cause of his heartache as he
could.  He was suffering the first pangs of blighted love, and he
didn't quite know what was the matter with him.  He thought that he was
angry with Taug, and so he couldn't understand why it was that he had
run away instead of rushing into mortal combat with the destroyer of
his happiness.

He also thought that he was angry with Teeka, yet a vision of her many
beauties persisted in haunting him, so that he could only see her in
the light of love as the most desirable thing in the world.

The ape-boy craved affection.  From babyhood until the time of her
death, when the poisoned arrow of Kulonga had pierced her savage heart,
Kala had represented to the English boy the sole object of love which
he had known.

In her wild, fierce way Kala had loved her adopted son, and Tarzan had
returned that love, though the outward demonstrations of it were no
greater than might have been expected from any other beast of the
jungle.  It was not until he was bereft of her that the boy realized
how deep had been his attachment for his mother, for as such he looked
upon her.

In Teeka he had seen within the past few hours a substitute for
Kala--someone to fight for and to hunt for--someone to caress; but now
his dream was shattered.  Something hurt within his breast.  He placed
his hand over his heart and wondered what had happened to him.  Vaguely
he attributed his pain to Teeka.  The more he thought of Teeka as he
had last seen her, caressing Taug, the more the thing within his breast
hurt him.

Tarzan shook his head and growled; then on and on through the jungle he
swung, and the farther he traveled and the more he thought upon his
wrongs, the nearer he approached becoming an irreclaimable misogynist.

Two days later he was still hunting alone--very morose and very
unhappy; but he was determined never to return to the tribe.  He could
not bear the thought of seeing Taug and Teeka always together.  As he
swung upon a great limb Numa, the lion, and Sabor, the lioness, passed
beneath him, side by side, and Sabor leaned against the lion and bit
playfully at his cheek.  It was a half-caress. Tarzan sighed and hurled
a nut at them.

Later he came upon several of Mbonga's black warriors.  He was upon the
point of dropping his noose about the neck of one of them, who was a
little distance from his companions, when he became interested in the
thing which occupied the savages.  They were building a cage in the
trail and covering it with leafy branches.  When they had completed
their work the structure was scarcely visible.

Tarzan wondered what the purpose of the thing might be, and why, when
they had built it, they turned away and started back along the trail in
the direction of their village.

It had been some time since Tarzan had visited the blacks and looked
down from the shelter of the great trees which overhung their palisade
upon the activities of his enemies, from among whom had come the slayer
of Kala.

Although he hated them, Tarzan derived considerable entertainment in
watching them at their daily life within the village, and especially at
their dances, when the fires glared against their naked bodies as they
leaped and turned and twisted in mimic warfare.  It was rather in the
hope of witnessing something of the kind that he now followed the
warriors back toward their village, but in this he was disappointed,
for there was no dance that night.

Instead, from the safe concealment of his tree, Tarzan saw little
groups seated about tiny fires discussing the events of the day, and in
the darker corners of the village he descried isolated couples talking
and laughing together, and always one of each couple was a young man
and the other a young woman.

Tarzan cocked his head upon one side and thought, and before he went to
sleep that night, curled in the crotch of the great tree above the
village, Teeka filled his mind, and afterward she filled his
dreams--she and the young black men laughing and talking with the young
black women.

Taug, hunting alone, had wandered some distance from the balance of the
tribe.  He was making his way slowly along an elephant path when he
discovered that it was blocked with undergrowth.  Now Taug, come into
maturity, was an evil-natured brute of an exceeding short temper.  When
something thwarted him, his sole idea was to overcome it by brute
strength and ferocity, and so now when he found his way blocked, he
tore angrily into the leafy screen and an instant later found himself
within a strange lair, his progress effectually blocked,
notwithstanding his most violent efforts to forge ahead.

Biting and striking at the barrier, Taug finally worked himself into a
frightful rage, but all to no avail; and at last he became convinced
that he must turn back.  But when he would have done so, what was his
chagrin to discover that another barrier had dropped behind him while
he fought to break down the one before him! Taug was trapped.  Until
exhaustion overcame him he fought frantically for his freedom; but all
for naught.

In the morning a party of blacks set out from the village of Mbonga in
the direction of the trap they had constructed the previous day, while
among the branches of the trees above them hovered a naked young giant
filled with the curiosity of the wild things.  Manu, the monkey,
chattered and scolded as Tarzan passed, and though he was not afraid of
the familiar figure of the ape-boy, he hugged closer to him the little
brown body of his life's companion.  Tarzan laughed as he saw it; but
the laugh was followed by a sudden clouding of his face and a deep sigh.

A little farther on, a gaily feathered bird strutted about before the
admiring eyes of his somber-hued mate.  It seemed to Tarzan that
everything in the jungle was combining to remind him that he had lost
Teeka; yet every day of his life he had seen these same things and
thought nothing of them.

When the blacks reached the trap, Taug set up a great commotion.
Seizing the bars of his prison, he shook them frantically, and all the
while he roared and growled terrifically.  The blacks were elated, for
while they had not built their trap for this hairy tree man, they were
delighted with their catch.

Tarzan pricked up his ears when he heard the voice of a great ape and,
circling quickly until he was down wind from the trap, he sniffed at
the air in search of the scent spoor of the prisoner.  Nor was it long
before there came to those delicate nostrils the familiar odor that
told Tarzan the identity of the captive as unerringly as though he had
looked upon Taug with his eyes.  Yes, it was Taug, and he was alone.

Tarzan grinned as he approached to discover what the blacks would do to
their prisoner.  Doubtless they would slay him at once.  Again Tarzan
grinned.  Now he could have Teeka for his own, with none to dispute his
right to her.  As he watched, he saw the black warriors strip the
screen from about the cage, fasten ropes to it and drag it away along
the trail in the direction of their village.

Tarzan watched until his rival passed out of sight, still beating upon
the bars of his prison and growling out his anger and his threats.
Then the ape-boy turned and swung rapidly off in search of the tribe,
and Teeka.

Once, upon the journey, he surprised Sheeta and his family in a little
overgrown clearing.  The great cat lay stretched upon the ground, while
his mate, one paw across her lord's savage face, licked at the soft
white fur at his throat.

Tarzan increased his speed then until he fairly flew through the
forest, nor was it long before he came upon the tribe.  He saw them
before they saw him, for of all the jungle creatures, none passed more
quietly than Tarzan of the Apes.  He saw Kamma and her mate feeding
side by side, their hairy bodies rubbing against each other.  And he
saw Teeka feeding by herself.  Not for long would she feed thus in
loneliness, thought Tarzan, as with a bound he landed amongst them.

There was a startled rush and a chorus of angry and frightened snarls,
for Tarzan had surprised them; but there was more, too, than mere
nervous shock to account for the bristling neck hair which remained
standing long after the apes had discovered the identity of the
newcomer.

Tarzan noticed this as he had noticed it many times in the past--that
always his sudden coming among them left them nervous and unstrung for
a considerable time, and that they one and all found it necessary to
satisfy themselves that he was indeed Tarzan by smelling about him a
half dozen or more times before they calmed down.

Pushing through them, he made his way toward Teeka; but as he
approached her the ape drew away.

"Teeka," he said, "it is Tarzan.  You belong to Tarzan.  I have come
for you."

The ape drew closer, looking him over carefully.  Finally she sniffed
at him, as though to make assurance doubly sure.

"Where is Taug?" she asked.

"The Gomangani have him," replied Tarzan.  "They will kill him."

In the eyes of the she, Tarzan saw a wistful expression and a troubled
look of sorrow as he told her of Taug's fate; but she came quite close
and snuggled against him, and Tarzan, Lord Greystoke, put his arm about
her.

As he did so he noticed, with a start, the strange incongruity of that
smooth, brown arm against the black and hairy coat of his lady-love. He
recalled the paw of Sheeta's mate across Sheeta's face--no incongruity
there.  He thought of little Manu hugging his she, and how the one
seemed to belong to the other.  Even the proud male bird, with his gay
plumage, bore a close resemblance to his quieter spouse, while Numa,
but for his shaggy mane, was almost a counterpart of Sabor, the
lioness.  The males and the females differed, it was true; but not with
such differences as existed between Tarzan and Teeka.

Tarzan was puzzled.  There was something wrong.  His arm dropped from
the shoulder of Teeka.  Very slowly he drew away from her.  She looked
at him with her head cocked upon one side.  Tarzan rose to his full
height and beat upon his breast with his fists.  He raised his head
toward the heavens and opened his mouth.  From the depths of his lungs
rose the fierce, weird challenge of the victorious bull ape.  The tribe
turned curiously to eye him.  He had killed nothing, nor was there any
antagonist to be goaded to madness by the savage scream.  No, there was
no excuse for it, and they turned back to their feeding, but with an
eye upon the ape-man lest he be preparing to suddenly run amuck.

As they watched him they saw him swing into a near-by tree and
disappear from sight.  Then they forgot him, even Teeka.

Mbonga's black warriors, sweating beneath their strenuous task, and
resting often, made slow progress toward their village.  Always the
savage beast in the primitive cage growled and roared when they moved
him.  He beat upon the bars and slavered at the mouth.  His noise was
hideous.

They had almost completed their journey and were making their final
rest before forging ahead to gain the clearing in which lay their
village.  A few more minutes would have taken them out of the forest,
and then, doubtless, the thing would not have happened which did happen.

A silent figure moved through the trees above them.  Keen eyes
inspected the cage and counted the number of warriors.  An alert and
daring brain figured upon the chances of success when a certain plan
should be put to the test.

Tarzan watched the blacks lolling in the shade.  They were exhausted.
Already several of them slept.  He crept closer, pausing just above
them.  Not a leaf rustled before his stealthy advance.  He waited in
the infinite patience of the beast of prey.  Presently but two of the
warriors remained awake, and one of these was dozing.

Tarzan of the Apes gathered himself, and as he did so the black who did
not sleep arose and passed around to the rear of the cage.  The ape-boy
followed just above his head.  Taug was eyeing the warrior and emitting
low growls.  Tarzan feared that the anthropoid would awaken the
sleepers.

In a whisper which was inaudible to the ears of the Negro, Tarzan
whispered Taug's name, cautioning the ape to silence, and Taug's
growling ceased.

The black approached the rear of the cage and examined the fastenings
of the door, and as he stood there the beast above him launched itself
from the tree full upon his back.  Steel fingers circled his throat,
choking the cry which sprang to the lips of the terrified man.  Strong
teeth fastened themselves in his shoulder, and powerful legs wound
themselves about his torso.

The black in a frenzy of terror tried to dislodge the silent thing
which clung to him.  He threw himself to the ground and rolled about;
but still those mighty fingers closed more and more tightly their
deadly grip.

The man's mouth gaped wide, his swollen tongue protruded, his eyes
started from their sockets; but the relentless fingers only increased
their pressure.

Taug was a silent witness of the struggle.  In his fierce little brain
he doubtless wondered what purpose prompted Tarzan to attack the black.
Taug had not forgotten his recent battle with the ape-boy, nor the
cause of it.  Now he saw the form of the Gomangani suddenly go limp.
There was a convulsive shiver and the man lay still.

Tarzan sprang from his prey and ran to the door of the cage.  With
nimble fingers he worked rapidly at the thongs which held the door in
place.  Taug could only watch--he could not help.  Presently Tarzan
pushed the thing up a couple of feet and Taug crawled out.  The ape
would have turned upon the sleeping blacks that he might wreak his pent
vengeance; but Tarzan would not permit it.

Instead, the ape-boy dragged the body of the black within the cage and
propped it against the side bars.  Then he lowered the door and made
fast the thongs as they had been before.

A happy smile lighted his features as he worked, for one of his
principal diversions was the baiting of the blacks of Mbonga's village.
He could imagine their terror when they awoke and found the dead body
of their comrade fast in the cage where they had left the great ape
safely secured but a few minutes before.

Tarzan and Taug took to the trees together, the shaggy coat of the
fierce ape brushing the sleek skin of the English lordling as they
passed through the primeval jungle side by side.

"Go back to Teeka," said Tarzan.  "She is yours.  Tarzan does not want
her."

"Tarzan has found another she?" asked Taug.

The ape-boy shrugged.

"For the Gomangani there is another Gomangani," he said; "for Numa, the
lion, there is Sabor, the lioness; for Sheeta there is a she of his own
kind; for Bara, the deer; for Manu, the monkey; for all the beasts and
the birds of the jungle is there a mate.  Only for Tarzan of the Apes
is there none.  Taug is an ape.  Teeka is an ape.  Go back to Teeka.
Tarzan is a man.  He will go alone."





                           2

                 The Capture of Tarzan

THE BLACK WARRIORS labored in the humid heat of the jungle's stifling
shade.  With war spears they loosened the thick, black loam and the
deep layers of rotting vegetation.  With heavy-nailed fingers they
scooped away the disintegrated earth from the center of the age-old
game trail.  Often they ceased their labors to squat, resting and
gossiping, with much laughter, at the edge of the pit they were digging.

Against the boles of near-by trees leaned their long, oval shields of
thick buffalo hide, and the spears of those who were doing the
scooping.  Sweat glistened upon their smooth, ebon skins, beneath which
rolled rounded muscles, supple in the perfection of nature's
uncontaminated health.

A reed buck, stepping warily along the trail toward water, halted as a
burst of laughter broke upon his startled ears.  For a moment he stood
statuesque but for his sensitively dilating nostrils; then he wheeled
and fled noiselessly from the terrifying presence of man.

A hundred yards away, deep in the tangle of impenetrable jungle, Numa,
the lion, raised his massive head.  Numa had dined well until almost
daybreak and it had required much noise to awaken him.  Now he lifted
his muzzle and sniffed the air, caught the acrid scent spoor of the
reed buck and the heavy scent of man.  But Numa was well filled.  With
a low, disgusted grunt he rose and slunk away.

Brilliantly plumaged birds with raucous voices darted from tree to
tree.  Little monkeys, chattering and scolding, swung through the
swaying limbs above the black warriors.  Yet they were alone, for the
teeming jungle with all its myriad life, like the swarming streets of a
great metropolis, is one of the loneliest spots in God's great universe.

But were they alone?

Above them, lightly balanced upon a leafy tree limb, a gray-eyed youth
watched with eager intentness their every move.  The fire of hate,
restrained, smoldered beneath the lad's evident desire to know the
purpose of the black men's labors.  Such a one as these it was who had
slain his beloved Kala.  For them there could be naught but enmity, yet
he liked well to watch them, avid as he was for greater knowledge of
the ways of man.

He saw the pit grow in depth until a great hole yawned the width of the
trail--a hole which was amply large enough to hold at one time all of
the six excavators.  Tarzan could not guess the purpose of so great a
labor.  And when they cut long stakes, sharpened at their upper ends,
and set them at intervals upright in the bottom of the pit, his
wonderment but increased, nor was it satisfied with the placing of the
light cross-poles over the pit, or the careful arrangement of leaves
and earth which completely hid from view the work the black men had
performed.

When they were done they surveyed their handiwork with evident
satisfaction, and Tarzan surveyed it, too.  Even to his practiced eye
there remained scarce a vestige of evidence that the ancient game trail
had been tampered with in any way.

So absorbed was the ape-man in speculation as to the purpose of the
covered pit that he permitted the blacks to depart in the direction of
their village without the usual baiting which had rendered him the
terror of Mbonga's people and had afforded Tarzan both a vehicle of
revenge and a source of inexhaustible delight.

Puzzle as he would, however, he could not solve the mystery of the
concealed pit, for the ways of the blacks were still strange ways to
Tarzan.  They had entered his jungle but a short time before--the first
of their kind to encroach upon the age-old supremacy of the beasts
which laired there.  To Numa, the lion, to Tantor, the elephant, to the
great apes and the lesser apes, to each and all of the myriad creatures
of this savage wild, the ways of man were new.  They had much to learn
of these black, hairless creatures that walked erect upon their hind
paws--and they were learning it slowly, and always to their sorrow.

Shortly after the blacks had departed, Tarzan swung easily to the
trail.  Sniffing suspiciously, he circled the edge of the pit.
Squatting upon his haunches, he scraped away a little earth to expose
one of the cross-bars. He sniffed at this, touched it, cocked his head
upon one side, and contemplated it gravely for several minutes.  Then
he carefully re-covered it, arranging the earth as neatly as had the
blacks.  This done, he swung himself back among the branches of the
trees and moved off in search of his hairy fellows, the great apes of
the tribe of Kerchak.

Once he crossed the trail of Numa, the lion, pausing for a moment to
hurl a soft fruit at the snarling face of his enemy, and to taunt and
insult him, calling him eater of carrion and brother of Dango, the
hyena.  Numa, his yellow-green eyes round and burning with concentrated
hate, glared up at the dancing figure above him.  Low growls vibrated
his heavy jowls and his great rage transmitted to his sinuous tail a
sharp, whiplike motion; but realizing from past experience the futility
of long distance argument with the ape-man, he turned presently and
struck off into the tangled vegetation which hid him from the view of
his tormentor.  With a final scream of jungle invective and an apelike
grimace at his departing foe, Tarzan continued along his way.

Another mile and a shifting wind brought to his keen nostrils a
familiar, pungent odor close at hand, and a moment later there loomed
beneath him a huge, gray-black bulk forging steadily along the jungle
trail.  Tarzan seized and broke a small tree limb, and at the sudden
cracking sound the ponderous figure halted.  Great ears were thrown
forward, and a long, supple trunk rose quickly to wave to and fro in
search of the scent of an enemy, while two weak, little eyes peered
suspiciously and futilely about in quest of the author of the noise
which had disturbed his peaceful way.

Tarzan laughed aloud and came closer above the head of the pachyderm.

"Tantor! Tantor!" he cried.  "Bara, the deer, is less fearful than
you--you, Tantor, the elephant, greatest of the jungle folk with the
strength of as many Numas as I have toes upon my feet and fingers upon
my hands.  Tantor, who can uproot great trees, trembles with fear at
the sound of a broken twig."

A rumbling noise, which might have been either a sign of contempt or a
sigh of relief, was Tantor's only reply as the uplifted trunk and ears
came down and the beast's tail dropped to normal; but his eyes still
roved about in search of Tarzan.  He was not long kept in suspense,
however, as to the whereabouts of the ape-man, for a second later the
youth dropped lightly to the broad head of his old friend.  Then
stretching himself at full length, he drummed with his bare toes upon
the thick hide, and as his fingers scratched the more tender surfaces
beneath the great ears, he talked to Tantor of the gossip of the jungle
as though the great beast understood every word that he said.

Much there was which Tarzan could make Tantor understand, and though
the small talk of the wild was beyond the great, gray dreadnaught of
the jungle, he stood with blinking eyes and gently swaying trunk as
though drinking in every word of it with keenest appreciation.  As a
matter of fact it was the pleasant, friendly voice and caressing hands
behind his ears which he enjoyed, and the close proximity of him whom
he had often borne upon his back since Tarzan, as a little child, had
once fearlessly approached the great bull, assuming upon the part of
the pachyderm the same friendliness which filled his own heart.

In the years of their association Tarzan had discovered that he
possessed an inexplicable power to govern and direct his mighty friend.
At his bidding, Tantor would come from a great distance--as far as his
keen ears could detect the shrill and piercing summons of the
ape-man--and when Tarzan was squatted upon his head, Tantor would
lumber through the jungle in any direction which his rider bade him go.
It was the power of the man-mind over that of the brute and it was just
as effective as though both fully understood its origin, though neither
did.

For half an hour Tarzan sprawled there upon Tantor's back.  Time had no
meaning for either of them.  Life, as they saw it, consisted
principally in keeping their stomachs filled.  To Tarzan this was a
less arduous labor than to Tantor, for Tarzan's stomach was smaller,
and being omnivorous, food was less difficult to obtain.  If one sort
did not come readily to hand, there were always many others to satisfy
his hunger.  He was less particular as to his diet than Tantor, who
would eat only the bark of certain trees, and the wood of others, while
a third appealed to him only through its leaves, and these, perhaps,
just at certain seasons of the year.

Tantor must needs spend the better part of his life in filling his
immense stomach against the needs of his mighty thews.  It is thus with
all the lower orders--their lives are so occupied either with searching
for food or with the processes of digestion that they have little time
for other considerations.  Doubtless it is this handicap which has kept
them from advancing as rapidly as man, who has more time to give to
thought upon other matters.

However, these questions troubled Tarzan but little, and Tantor not at
all.  What the former knew was that he was happy in the companionship
of the elephant.  He did not know why.  He did not know that because he
was a human being--a normal, healthy human being--he craved some living
thing upon which to lavish his affection.  His childhood playmates
among the apes of Kerchak were now great, sullen brutes.  They felt nor
inspired but little affection.  The younger apes Tarzan still played
with occasionally.  In his savage way he loved them; but they were far
from satisfying or restful companions.  Tantor was a great mountain of
calm, of poise, of stability.  It was restful and satisfying to sprawl
upon his rough pate and pour one's vague hopes and aspirations into the
great ears which flapped ponderously to and fro in apparent
understanding.  Of all the jungle folk, Tantor commanded Tarzan's
greatest love since Kala had been taken from him.  Sometimes Tarzan
wondered if Tantor reciprocated his affection.  It was difficult to
know.

It was the call of the stomach--the most compelling and insistent call
which the jungle knows--that took Tarzan finally back to the trees and
off in search of food, while Tantor continued his interrupted journey
in the opposite direction.

For an hour the ape-man foraged.  A lofty nest yielded its fresh, warm
harvest.  Fruits, berries, and tender plantain found a place upon his
menu in the order that he happened upon them, for he did not seek such
foods.  Meat, meat, meat! It was always meat that Tarzan of the Apes
hunted; but sometimes meat eluded him, as today.

And as he roamed the jungle his active mind busied itself not alone
with his hunting, but with many other subjects.  He had a habit of
recalling often the events of the preceding days and hours.  He lived
over his visit with Tantor; he cogitated upon the digging blacks and
the strange, covered pit they had left behind them.  He wondered again
and again what its purpose might be.  He compared perceptions and
arrived at judgments.  He compared judgments, reaching conclusions--not
always correct ones, it is true, but at least he used his brain for the
purpose God intended it, which was the less difficult because he was
not handicapped by the second-hand, and usually erroneous, judgment of
others.

And as he puzzled over the covered pit, there loomed suddenly before
his mental vision a huge, gray-black bulk which lumbered ponderously
along a jungle trail.  Instantly Tarzan tensed to the shock of a sudden
fear.  Decision and action usually occurred simultaneously in the life
of the ape-man, and now he was away through the leafy branches ere the
realization of the pit's purpose had scarce formed in his mind.

Swinging from swaying limb to swaying limb, he raced through the middle
terraces where the trees grew close together.  Again he dropped to the
ground and sped, silently and light of foot, over the carpet of
decaying vegetation, only to leap again into the trees where the
tangled undergrowth precluded rapid advance upon the surface.

In his anxiety he cast discretion to the winds.  The caution of the
beast was lost in the loyalty of the man, and so it came that he
entered a large clearing, denuded of trees, without a thought of what
might lie there or upon the farther edge to dispute the way with him.

He was half way across when directly in his path and but a few yards
away there rose from a clump of tall grasses a half dozen chattering
birds.  Instantly Tarzan turned aside, for he knew well enough what
manner of creature the presence of these little sentinels proclaimed.
Simultaneously Buto, the rhinoceros, scrambled to his short legs and
charged furiously.  Haphazard charges Buto, the rhinoceros.  With his
weak eyes he sees but poorly even at short distances, and whether his
erratic rushes are due to the panic of fear as he attempts to escape,
or to the irascible temper with which he is generally credited, it is
difficult to determine.  Nor is the matter of little moment to one whom
Buto charges, for if he be caught and tossed, the chances are that
naught will interest him thereafter.

And today it chanced that Buto bore down straight upon Tarzan, across
the few yards of knee-deep grass which separated them.  Accident
started him in the direction of the ape-man, and then his weak eyes
discerned the enemy, and with a series of snorts he charged straight
for him.  The little rhino birds fluttered and circled about their
giant ward.  Among the branches of the trees at the edge of the
clearing, a score or more monkeys chattered and scolded as the loud
snorts of the angry beast sent them scurrying affrightedly to the upper
terraces.  Tarzan alone appeared indifferent and serene.

Directly in the path of the charge he stood.  There had been no time to
seek safety in the trees beyond the clearing, nor had Tarzan any mind
to delay his journey because of Buto.  He had met the stupid beast
before and held him in fine contempt.

And now Buto was upon him, the massive head lowered and the long, heavy
horn inclined for the frightful work for which nature had designed it;
but as he struck upward, his weapon raked only thin air, for the
ape-man had sprung lightly aloft with a catlike leap that carried him
above the threatening horn to the broad back of the rhinoceros.
Another spring and he was on the ground behind the brute and racing
like a deer for the trees.

Buto, angered and mystified by the strange disappearance of his prey,
wheeled and charged frantically in another direction, which chanced to
be not the direction of Tarzan's flight, and so the ape-man came in
safety to the trees and continued on his swift way through the forest.

Some distance ahead of him Tantor moved steadily along the well-worn
elephant trail, and ahead of Tantor a crouching, black warrior listened
intently in the middle of the path.  Presently he heard the sound for
which he had been hoping--the cracking, snapping sound which heralded
the approach of an elephant.

To his right and left in other parts of the jungle other warriors were
watching.  A low signal, passed from one to another, apprised the most
distant that the quarry was afoot.  Rapidly they converged toward the
trail, taking positions in trees down wind from the point at which
Tantor must pass them.  Silently they waited and presently were
rewarded by the sight of a mighty tusker carrying an amount of ivory in
his long tusks that set their greedy hearts to palpitating.

No sooner had he passed their positions than the warriors clambered
from their perches.  No longer were they silent, but instead clapped
their hands and shouted as they reached the ground.  For an instant
Tantor, the elephant, paused with upraised trunk and tail, with great
ears up-pricked, and then he swung on along the trail at a rapid,
shuffling pace--straight toward the covered pit with its sharpened
stakes upstanding in the ground.

Behind him came the yelling warriors, urging him on in the rapid flight
which would not permit a careful examination of the ground before him.
Tantor, the elephant, who could have turned and scattered his
adversaries with a single charge, fled like a frightened deer--fled
toward a hideous, torturing death.

And behind them all came Tarzan of the Apes, racing through the jungle
forest with the speed and agility of a squirrel, for he had heard the
shouts of the warriors and had interpreted them correctly.  Once he
uttered a piercing call that reverberated through the jungle; but
Tantor, in the panic of terror, either failed to hear, or hearing,
dared not pause to heed.

Now the giant pachyderm was but a few yards from the hidden death
lurking in his path, and the blacks, certain of success, were screaming
and dancing in his wake, waving their war spears and celebrating in
advance the acquisition of the splendid ivory carried by their prey and
the surfeit of elephant meat which would be theirs this night.

So intent were they upon their gratulations that they entirely failed
to note the silent passage of the man-beast above their heads, nor did
Tantor, either, see or hear him, even though Tarzan called to him to
stop.

A few more steps would precipitate Tantor upon the sharpened stakes;
Tarzan fairly flew through the trees until he had come abreast of the
fleeing animal and then had passed him.  At the pit's verge the ape-man
dropped to the ground in the center of the trail.  Tantor was almost
upon him before his weak eyes permitted him to recognize his old friend.

"Stop!" cried Tarzan, and the great beast halted to the upraised hand.

Tarzan turned and kicked aside some of the brush which hid the pit.
Instantly Tantor saw and understood.

"Fight!" growled Tarzan.  "They are coming behind you." But Tantor, the
elephant, is a huge bunch of nerves, and now he was half panic-stricken
by terror.

Before him yawned the pit, how far he did not know, but to right and
left lay the primeval jungle untouched by man.  With a squeal the great
beast turned suddenly at right angles and burst his noisy way through
the solid wall of matted vegetation that would have stopped any but him.

Tarzan, standing upon the edge of the pit, smiled as he watched
Tantor's undignified flight.  Soon the blacks would come.  It was best
that Tarzan of the Apes faded from the scene.  He essayed a step from
the pit's edge, and as he threw the weight of his body upon his left
foot, the earth crumbled away.  Tarzan made a single Herculean effort
to throw himself forward, but it was too late.  Backward and downward
he went toward the sharpened stakes in the bottom of the pit.

When, a moment later, the blacks came they saw even from a distance
that Tantor had eluded them, for the size of the hole in the pit
covering was too small to have accommodated the huge bulk of an
elephant.  At first they thought that their prey had put one great foot
through the top and then, warned, drawn back; but when they had come to
the pit's verge and peered over, their eyes went wide in astonishment,
for, quiet and still, at the bottom lay the naked figure of a white
giant.

Some of them there had glimpsed this forest god before and they drew
back in terror, awed by the presence which they had for some time
believed to possess the miraculous powers of a demon; but others there
were who pushed forward, thinking only of the capture of an enemy, and
these leaped into the pit and lifted Tarzan out.

There was no scar upon his body.  None of the sharpened stakes had
pierced him--only a swollen spot at the base of the brain indicated the
nature of his injury.  In the falling backward his head had struck upon
the side of one of the stakes, rendering him unconscious.  The blacks
were quick to discover this, and equally quick to bind their prisoner's
arms and legs before he should regain consciousness, for they had
learned to harbor a wholesome respect for this strange man-beast that
consorted with the hairy tree folk.

They had carried him but a short distance toward their village when the
ape-man's eyelids quivered and raised.  He looked about him wonderingly
for a moment, and then full consciousness returned and he realized the
seriousness of his predicament.  Accustomed almost from birth to
relying solely upon his own resources, he did not cast about for
outside aid now, but devoted his mind to a consideration of the
possibilities for escape which lay within himself and his own powers.

He did not dare test the strength of his bonds while the blacks were
carrying him, for fear they would become apprehensive and add to them.
Presently his captors discovered that he was conscious, and as they had
little stomach for carrying a heavy man through the jungle heat, they
set him upon his feet and forced him forward among them, pricking him
now and then with their spears, yet with every manifestation of the
superstitious awe in which they held him.

When they discovered that their prodding brought no outward evidence of
suffering, their awe increased, so that they soon desisted, half
believing that this strange white giant was a supernatural being and so
was immune from pain.

As they approached their village, they shouted aloud the victorious
cries of successful warriors, so that by the time they reached the
gate, dancing and waving their spears, a great crowd of men, women, and
children were gathered there to greet them and hear the story of their
adventure.

As the eyes of the villagers fell upon the prisoner, they went wild,
and heavy jaws fell open in astonishment and incredulity.  For months
they had lived in perpetual terror of a weird, white demon whom but few
had ever glimpsed and lived to describe.  Warriors had disappeared from
the paths almost within sight of the village and from the midst of
their companions as mysteriously and completely as though they had been
swallowed by the earth, and later, at night, their dead bodies had
fallen, as from the heavens, into the village street.

This fearsome creature had appeared by night in the huts of the
village, killed, and disappeared, leaving behind him in the huts with
his dead, strange and terrifying evidences of an uncanny sense of humor.

But now he was in their power! No longer could he terrorize them.
Slowly the realization of this dawned upon them.  A woman, screaming,
ran forward and struck the ape-man across the face.  Another and
another followed her example, until Tarzan of the Apes was surrounded
by a fighting, clawing, yelling mob of natives.

And then Mbonga, the chief, came, and laying his spear heavily across
the shoulders of his people, drove them from their prey.

"We will save him until night," he said.

Far out in the jungle Tantor, the elephant, his first panic of fear
allayed, stood with up-pricked ears and undulating trunk.  What was
passing through the convolutions of his savage brain? Could he be
searching for Tarzan?  Could he recall and measure the service the
ape-man had performed for him? Of that there can be no doubt.  But did
he feel gratitude? Would he have risked his own life to have saved
Tarzan could he have known of the danger which confronted his friend?
You will doubt it.  Anyone at all familiar with elephants will doubt
it.  Englishmen who have hunted much with elephants in India will tell
you that they never have heard of an instance in which one of these
animals has gone to the aid of a man in danger, even though the man had
often befriended it.  And so it is to be doubted that Tantor would have
attempted to overcome his instinctive fear of the black men in an
effort to succor Tarzan.

The screams of the infuriated villagers came faintly to his sensitive
ears, and he wheeled, as though in terror, contemplating flight; but
something stayed him, and again he turned about, raised his trunk, and
gave voice to a shrill cry.

Then he stood listening.

In the distant village where Mbonga had restored quiet and order, the
voice of Tantor was scarcely audible to the blacks, but to the keen
ears of Tarzan of the Apes it bore its message.

His captors were leading him to a hut where he might be confined and
guarded against the coming of the nocturnal orgy that would mark his
torture-laden death.  He halted as he heard the notes of Tantor's call,
and raising his head, gave vent to a terrifying scream that sent cold
chills through the superstitious blacks and caused the warriors who
guarded him to leap back even though their prisoner's arms were
securely bound behind him.

With raised spears they encircled him as for a moment longer he stood
listening.  Faintly from the distance came another, an answering cry,
and Tarzan of the Apes, satisfied, turned and quietly pursued his way
toward the hut where he was to be imprisoned.

The afternoon wore on.  From the surrounding village the ape-man heard
the bustle of preparation for the feast.  Through the doorway of the
hut he saw the women laying the cooking fires and filling their earthen
caldrons with water; but above it all his ears were bent across the
jungle in eager listening for the coming of Tantor.

Even Tarzan but half believed that he would come.  He knew Tantor even
better than Tantor knew himself.  He knew the timid heart which lay in
the giant body.  He knew the panic of terror which the scent of the
Gomangani inspired within that savage breast, and as night drew on,
hope died within his heart and in the stoic calm of the wild beast
which he was, he resigned himself to meet the fate which awaited him.

All afternoon he had been working, working, working with the bonds that
held his wrists.  Very slowly they were giving.  He might free his
hands before they came to lead him out to be butchered, and if he
did--Tarzan licked his lips in anticipation, and smiled a cold, grim
smile.  He could imagine the feel of soft flesh beneath his fingers and
the sinking of his white teeth into the throats of his foemen.  He
would let them taste his wrath before they overpowered him!

At last they came--painted, befeathered warriors--even more hideous
than nature had intended them.  They came and pushed him into the open,
where his appearance was greeted by wild shouts from the assembled
villagers.

To the stake they led him, and as they pushed him roughly against it
preparatory to binding him there securely for the dance of death that
would presently encircle him, Tarzan tensed his mighty thews and with a
single, powerful wrench parted the loosened thongs which had secured
his hands.  Like thought, for quickness, he leaped forward among the
warriors nearest him.  A blow sent one to earth, as, growling and
snarling, the beast-man leaped upon the breast of another.  His fangs
were buried instantly in the jugular of his adversary and then a half
hundred black men had leaped upon him and borne him to earth.

Striking, clawing, and snapping, the ape-man fought--fought as his
foster people had taught him to fight--fought like a wild beast
cornered.  His strength, his agility, his courage, and his intelligence
rendered him easily a match for half a dozen black men in a
hand-to-hand struggle, but not even Tarzan of the Apes could hope to
successfully cope with half a hundred.

Slowly they were overpowering him, though a score of them bled from
ugly wounds, and two lay very still beneath the trampling feet, and the
rolling bodies of the contestants.

Overpower him they might, but could they keep him overpowered while
they bound him? A half hour of desperate endeavor convinced them that
they could not, and so Mbonga, who, like all good rulers, had circled
in the safety of the background, called to one to work his way in and
spear the victim.  Gradually, through the milling, battling men, the
warrior approached the object of his quest.

He stood with poised spear above his head waiting for the instant that
would expose a vulnerable part of the ape-man's body and still not
endanger one of the blacks.  Closer and closer he edged about,
following the movements of the twisting, scuffling combatants.  The
growls of the ape-man sent cold chills up the warrior's spine, causing
him to go carefully lest he miss at the first cast and lay himself open
to an attack from those merciless teeth and mighty hands.

At last he found an opening.  Higher he raised his spear, tensing his
muscles, rolling beneath his glistening, ebon hide, and then from the
jungle just beyond the palisade came a thunderous crashing.  The
spear-hand paused, the black cast a quick glance in the direction of
the disturbance, as did the others of the blacks who were not occupied
with the subjugation of the ape-man.

In the glare of the fires they saw a huge bulk topping the barrier.
They saw the palisade belly and sway inward.  They saw it burst as
though built of straws, and an instant later Tantor, the elephant,
thundered down upon them.

To right and left the blacks fled, screaming in terror.  Some who
hovered upon the verge of the strife with Tarzan heard and made good
their escape, but a half dozen there were so wrapt in the blood-madness
of battle that they failed to note the approach of the giant tusker.

Upon these Tantor charged, trumpeting furiously.  Above them he
stopped, his sensitive trunk weaving among them, and there, at the
bottom, he found Tarzan, bloody, but still battling.

A warrior turned his eyes upward from the melee.  Above him towered the
gigantic bulk of the pachyderm, the little eyes flashing with the
reflected light of the fires--wicked, frightful, terrifying.  The
warrior screamed, and as he screamed, the sinuous trunk encircled him,
lifted him high above the ground, and hurled him far after the fleeing
crowd.

Another and another Tantor wrenched from the body of the ape-man,
throwing them to right and to left, where they lay either moaning or
very quiet, as death came slowly or at once.

At a distance Mbonga rallied his warriors.  His greedy eyes had noted
the great ivory tusks of the bull.  The first panic of terror relieved,
he urged his men forward to attack with their heavy elephant spears;
but as they came, Tantor swung Tarzan to his broad head, and, wheeling,
lumbered off into the jungle through the great rent he had made in the
palisade.

Elephant hunters may be right when they aver that this animal would not
have rendered such service to a man, but to Tantor, Tarzan was not a
man--he was but a fellow jungle beast.

And so it was that Tantor, the elephant, discharged an obligation to
Tarzan of the Apes, cementing even more closely the friendship that had
existed between them since Tarzan as a little, brown boy rode upon
Tantor's huge back through the moonlit jungle beneath the equatorial
stars.




                           3

                The Fight for the Balu

TEEKA HAD BECOME a mother.  Tarzan of the Apes was intensely
interested, much more so, in fact, than Taug, the father.  Tarzan was
very fond of Teeka.  Even the cares of prospective motherhood had not
entirely quenched the fires of carefree youth, and Teeka had remained a
good-natured playmate even at an age when other shes of the tribe of
Kerchak had assumed the sullen dignity of maturity.  She yet retained
her childish delight in the primitive games of tag and hide-and-go-seek
which Tarzan's fertile man-mind had evolved.

To play tag through the tree tops is an exciting and inspiring pastime.
Tarzan delighted in it, but the bulls of his childhood had long since
abandoned such childish practices.  Teeka, though, had been keen for it
always until shortly before the baby came; but with the advent of her
first-born, even Teeka changed.

The evidence of the change surprised and hurt Tarzan immeasurably.  One
morning he saw Teeka squatted upon a low branch hugging something very
close to her hairy breast--a wee something which squirmed and wriggled.
Tarzan approached filled with the curiosity which is common to all
creatures endowed with brains which have progressed beyond the
microscopic stage.

Teeka rolled her eyes in his direction and strained the squirming mite
still closer to her.  Tarzan came nearer.  Teeka drew away and bared
her fangs.  Tarzan was nonplussed.  In all his experiences with Teeka,
never before had she bared fangs at him other than in play; but today
she did not look playful.  Tarzan ran his brown fingers through his
thick, black hair, cocked his head upon one side, and stared.  Then he
edged a bit nearer, craning his neck to have a better look at the thing
which Teeka cuddled.

Again Teeka drew back her upper lip in a warning snarl.  Tarzan reached
forth a hand, cautiously, to touch the thing which Teeka held, and
Teeka, with a hideous growl, turned suddenly upon him.  Her teeth sank
into the flesh of his forearm before the ape-man could snatch it away,
and she pursued him for a short distance as he retreated incontinently
through the trees; but Teeka, carrying her baby, could not overtake
him.  At a safe distance Tarzan stopped and turned to regard his
erstwhile play-fellow in unconcealed astonishment.  What had happened
to so alter the gentle Teeka? She had so covered the thing in her arms
that Tarzan had not yet been able to recognize it for what it was; but
now, as she turned from the pursuit of him, he saw it.  Through his
pain and chagrin he smiled, for Tarzan had seen young ape mothers
before.  In a few days she would be less suspicious.  Still Tarzan was
hurt; it was not right that Teeka, of all others, should fear him.
Why, not for the world would he harm her, or her balu, which is the ape
word for baby.

And now, above the pain of his injured arm and the hurt to his pride,
rose a still stronger desire to come close and inspect the new-born son
of Taug.  Possibly you will wonder that Tarzan of the Apes, mighty
fighter that he was, should have fled before the irritable attack of a
she, or that he should hesitate to return for the satisfaction of his
curiosity when with ease he might have vanquished the weakened mother
of the new-born cub; but you need not wonder.  Were you an ape, you
would know that only a bull in the throes of madness will turn upon a
female other than to gently chastise her, with the occasional exception
of the individual whom we find exemplified among our own kind, and who
delights in beating up his better half because she happens to be
smaller and weaker than he.

Tarzan again came toward the young mother--warily and with his line of
retreat safely open.  Again Teeka growled ferociously.  Tarzan
expostulated.

"Tarzan of the Apes will not harm Teeka's balu," he said.  "Let me see
it."

"Go away!" commanded Teeka.  "Go away, or I will kill you."

"Let me see it," urged Tarzan.

"Go away," reiterated the she-ape. "Here comes Taug.  He will make you
go away.  Taug will kill you.  This is Taug's balu."

A savage growl close behind him apprised Tarzan of the nearness of
Taug, and the fact that the bull had heard the warnings and threats of
his mate and was coming to her succor.

Now Taug, as well as Teeka, had been Tarzan's play-fellow while the
bull was still young enough to wish to play.  Once Tarzan had saved
Taug's life; but the memory of an ape is not overlong, nor would
gratitude rise above the parental instinct.  Tarzan and Taug had once
measured strength, and Tarzan had been victorious.  That fact Taug
could be depended upon still to remember; but even so, he might readily
face another defeat for his first-born--if he chanced to be in the
proper mood.

From his hideous growls, which now rose in strength and volume, he
seemed to be in quite the mood.  Now Tarzan felt no fear of Taug, nor
did the unwritten law of the jungle demand that he should flee from
battle with any male, unless he cared to from purely personal reasons.
But Tarzan liked Taug.  He had no grudge against him, and his man-mind
told him what the mind of an ape would never have deduced--that Taug's
attitude in no sense indicated hatred.  It was but the instinctive urge
of the male to protect its offspring and its mate.

Tarzan had no desire to battle with Taug, nor did the blood of his
English ancestors relish the thought of flight, yet when the bull
charged, Tarzan leaped nimbly to one side, and thus encouraged, Taug
wheeled and rushed again madly to the attack.  Perhaps the memory of a
past defeat at Tarzan's hands goaded him.  Perhaps the fact that Teeka
sat there watching him aroused a desire to vanquish the ape-man before
her eyes, for in the breast of every jungle male lurks a vast egotism
which finds expression in the performance of deeds of derring-do before
an audience of the opposite sex.

At the ape-man's side swung his long grass rope--the play-thing of
yesterday, the weapon of today--and as Taug charged the second time,
Tarzan slipped the coils over his head and deftly shook out the sliding
noose as he again nimbly eluded the ungainly beast.  Before the ape
could turn again, Tarzan had fled far aloft among the branches of the
upper terrace.

Taug, now wrought to a frenzy of real rage, followed him.  Teeka peered
upward at them.  It was difficult to say whether she was interested.
Taug could not climb as rapidly as Tarzan, so the latter reached the
high levels to which the heavy ape dared not follow before the former
overtook him.  There he halted and looked down upon his pursuer, making
faces at him and calling him such choice names as occurred to the
fertile man-brain. Then, when he had worked Taug to such a pitch of
foaming rage that the great bull fairly danced upon the bending limb
beneath him, Tarzan's hand shot suddenly outward, a widening noose
dropped swiftly through the air, there was a quick jerk as it settled
about Taug, falling to his knees, a jerk that tightened it securely
about the hairy legs of the anthropoid.

Taug, slow of wit, realized too late the intention of his tormentor.
He scrambled to escape, but the ape-man gave the rope a tremendous jerk
that pulled Taug from his perch, and a moment later, growling
hideously, the ape hung head downward thirty feet above the ground.

Tarzan secured the rope to a stout limb and descended to a point close
to Taug.

"Taug," he said, "you are as stupid as Buto, the rhinoceros.  Now you
may hang here until you get a little sense in your thick head.  You may
hang here and watch while I go and talk with Teeka."

Taug blustered and threatened, but Tarzan only grinned at him as he
dropped lightly to the lower levels.  Here he again approached Teeka
only to be again greeted with bared fangs and menacing growls.  He
sought to placate her; he urged his friendly intentions, and craned his
neck to have a look at Teeka's balu; but the she-ape was not to be
persuaded that he meant other than harm to her little one.  Her
motherhood was still so new that reason was yet subservient to instinct.

Realizing the futility of attempting to catch and chastise Tarzan,
Teeka sought to escape him.  She dropped to the ground and lumbered
across the little clearing about which the apes of the tribe were
disposed in rest or in the search of food, and presently Tarzan
abandoned his attempts to persuade her to permit a close examination of
the balu.  The ape-man would have liked to handle the tiny thing.  The
very sight of it awakened in his breast a strange yearning.  He wished
to cuddle and fondle the grotesque little ape-thing. It was Teeka's
balu and Tarzan had once lavished his young affections upon Teeka.

But now his attention was diverted by the voice of Taug.  The threats
that had filled the ape's mouth had turned to pleas.  The tightening
noose was stopping the circulation of the blood in his legs--he was
beginning to suffer.  Several apes sat near him highly interested in
his predicament.  They made uncomplimentary remarks about him, for each
of them had felt the weight of Taug's mighty hands and the strength of
his great jaws.  They were enjoying revenge.

Teeka, seeing that Tarzan had turned back toward the trees, had halted
in the center of the clearing, and there she sat hugging her balu and
casting suspicious glances here and there.  With the coming of the
balu, Teeka's care-free world had suddenly become peopled with
innumerable enemies.  She saw an implacable foe in Tarzan, always
heretofore her best friend.  Even poor old Mumga, half blind and almost
entirely toothless, searching patiently for grubworms beneath a fallen
log, represented to her a malignant spirit thirsting for the blood of
little balus.

And while Teeka guarded suspiciously against harm, where there was no
harm, she failed to note two baleful, yellow-green eyes staring fixedly
at her from behind a clump of bushes at the opposite side of the
clearing.

Hollow from hunger, Sheeta, the panther, glared greedily at the
tempting meat so close at hand, but the sight of the great bulls beyond
gave him pause.

Ah, if the she-ape with her balu would but come just a trifle nearer! A
quick spring and he would be upon them and away again with his meat
before the bulls could prevent.

The tip of his tawny tail moved in spasmodic little jerks; his lower
jaw hung low, exposing a red tongue and yellow fangs.  But all this
Teeka did not see, nor did any other of the apes who were feeding or
resting about her.  Nor did Tarzan or the apes in the trees.

Hearing the abuse which the bulls were pouring upon the helpless Taug,
Tarzan clambered quickly among them.  One was edging closer and leaning
far out in an effort to reach the dangling ape.  He had worked himself
into quite a fury through recollection of the last occasion upon which
Taug had mauled him, and now he was bent upon revenge.  Once he had
grasped the swinging ape, he would quickly have drawn him within reach
of his jaws.  Tarzan saw and was wroth.  He loved a fair fight, but the
thing which this ape contemplated revolted him.  Already a hairy hand
had clutched the helpless Taug when, with an angry growl of protest,
Tarzan leaped to the branch at the attacking ape's side, and with a
single mighty cuff, swept him from his perch.

Surprised and enraged, the bull clutched madly for support as he
toppled sidewise, and then with an agile movement succeeded in
projecting himself toward another limb a few feet below.  Here he found
a hand-hold, quickly righted himself, and as quickly clambered upward
to be revenged upon Tarzan, but the ape-man was otherwise engaged and
did not wish to be interrupted.  He was explaining again to Taug the
depths of the latter's abysmal ignorance, and pointing out how much
greater and mightier was Tarzan of the Apes than Taug or any other ape.

In the end he would release Taug, but not until Taug was fully
acquainted with his own inferiority.  And then the maddened bull came
from beneath, and instantly Tarzan was transformed from a good-natured,
teasing youth into a snarling, savage beast.  Along his scalp the hair
bristled: his upper lip drew back that his fighting fangs might be
uncovered and ready.  He did not wait for the bull to reach him, for
something in the appearance or the voice of the attacker aroused within
the ape-man a feeling of belligerent antagonism that would not be
denied.  With a scream that carried no human note, Tarzan leaped
straight at the throat of the attacker.

The impetuosity of this act and the weight and momentum of his body
carried the bull backward, clutching and clawing for support, down
through the leafy branches of the tree.  For fifteen feet the two fell,
Tarzan's teeth buried in the jugular of his opponent, when a stout
branch stopped their descent.  The bull struck full upon the small of
his back across the limb, hung there for a moment with the ape-man
still upon his breast, and then toppled over toward the ground.

Tarzan had felt the instantaneous relaxation of the body beneath him
after the heavy impact with the tree limb, and as the other turned
completely over and started again upon its fall toward the ground, he
reached forth a hand and caught the branch in time to stay his own
descent, while the ape dropped like a plummet to the foot of the tree.

Tarzan looked downward for a moment upon the still form of his late
antagonist, then he rose to his full height, swelled his deep chest,
smote upon it with his clenched fist and roared out the uncanny
challenge of the victorious bull ape.

Even Sheeta, the panther, crouched for a spring at the edge of the
little clearing, moved uneasily as the mighty voice sent its weird cry
reverberating through the jungle.  To right and left, nervously,
glanced Sheeta, as though assuring himself that the way of escape lay
ready at hand.

"I am Tarzan of the Apes," boasted the ape-man; "mighty hunter, mighty
fighter! None in all the jungle so great as Tarzan."

Then he made his way back in the direction of Taug.  Teeka had watched
the happenings in the tree.  She had even placed her precious balu upon
the soft grasses and come a little nearer that she might better witness
all that was passing in the branches above her.  In her heart of hearts
did she still esteem the smooth-skinned Tarzan?  Did her savage breast
swell with pride as she witnessed his victory over the ape? You will
have to ask Teeka.

And Sheeta, the panther, saw that the she-ape had left her cub alone
among the grasses.  He moved his tail again, as though this closest
approximation of lashing in which he dared indulge might stimulate his
momentarily waned courage.  The cry of the victorious ape-man still
held his nerves beneath its spell.  It would be several minutes before
he again could bring himself to the point of charging into view of the
giant anthropoids.

And as he regathered his forces, Tarzan reached Taug's side, and then
clambering higher up to the point where the end of the grass rope was
made fast, he unloosed it and lowered the ape slowly downward, swinging
him in until the clutching hands fastened upon a limb.

Quickly Taug drew himself to a position of safety and shook off the
noose.  In his rage-maddened heart was no room for gratitude to the
ape-man. He recalled only the fact that Tarzan had laid this painful
indignity upon him.  He would be revenged, but just at present his legs
were so numb and his head so dizzy that he must postpone the
gratification of his vengeance.

Tarzan was coiling his rope the while he lectured Taug on the futility
of pitting his poor powers, physical and intellectual, against those of
his betters.  Teeka had come close beneath the tree and was peering
upward.  Sheeta was worming his way stealthily forward, his belly close
to the ground.  In another moment he would be clear of the underbrush
and ready for the rapid charge and the quick retreat that would end the
brief existence of Teeka's balu.

Then Tarzan chanced to look up and across the clearing.  Instantly his
attitude of good-natured bantering and pompous boastfulness dropped
from him.  Silently and swiftly he shot downward toward the ground.
Teeka, seeing him coming, and thinking that he was after her or her
balu, bristled and prepared to fight.  But Tarzan sped by her, and as
he went, her eyes followed him and she saw the cause of his sudden
descent and his rapid charge across the clearing.  There in full sight
now was Sheeta, the panther, stalking slowly toward the tiny, wriggling
balu which lay among the grasses many yards away.

Teeka gave voice to a shrill scream of terror and of warning as she
dashed after the ape-man. Sheeta saw Tarzan coming.  He saw the
she-ape's cub before him, and he thought that this other was bent upon
robbing him of his prey.  With an angry growl, he charged.

Taug, warned by Teeka's cry, came lumbering down to her assistance.
Several other bulls, growling and barking, closed in toward the
clearing, but they were all much farther from the balu and the panther
than was Tarzan of the Apes, so it was that Sheeta and the ape-man
reached Teeka's little one almost simultaneously; and there they stood,
one upon either side of it, baring their fangs and snarling at each
other over the little creature.

Sheeta was afraid to seize the balu, for thus he would give the ape-man
an opening for attack; and for the same reason Tarzan hesitated to
snatch the panther's prey out of harm's way, for had he stooped to
accomplish this, the great beast would have been upon him in an
instant.  Thus they stood while Teeka came across the clearing, going
more slowly as she neared the panther, for even her mother love could
scarce overcome her instinctive terror of this natural enemy of her
kind.

Behind her came Taug, warily and with many pauses and much bluster, and
still behind him came other bulls, snarling ferociously and uttering
their uncanny challenges.  Sheeta's yellow-green eyes glared terribly
at Tarzan, and past Tarzan they shot brief glances at the apes of
Kerchak advancing upon him.  Discretion prompted him to turn and flee,
but hunger and the close proximity of the tempting morsel in the grass
before him urged him to remain.  He reached forth a paw toward Teeka's
balu, and as he did so, with a savage guttural, Tarzan of the Apes was
upon him.

The panther reared to meet the ape-man's attack.  He swung a frightful
raking blow for Tarzan that would have wiped his face away had it
landed, but it did not land, for Tarzan ducked beneath it and closed,
his long knife ready in one strong hand--the knife of his dead father,
of the father he never had known.

Instantly the balu was forgotten by Sheeta, the panther.  He now
thought only of tearing to ribbons with his powerful talons the flesh
of his antagonist, of burying his long, yellow fangs in the soft,
smooth hide of the ape-man, but Tarzan had fought before with clawed
creatures of the jungle.  Before now he had battled with fanged
monsters, nor always had he come away unscathed.  He knew the risk that
he ran, but Tarzan of the Apes, inured to the sight of suffering and
death, shrank from neither, for he feared neither.

The instant that he dodged beneath Sheeta's blow, he leaped to the
beast's rear and then full upon the tawny back, burying his teeth in
Sheeta's neck and the fingers of one hand in the fur at the throat, and
with the other hand he drove his blade into Sheeta's side.

Over and over upon the grass rolled Sheeta, growling and screaming,
clawing and biting, in a mad effort to dislodge his antagonist or get
some portion of his body within range of teeth or talons.

As Tarzan leaped to close quarters with the panther, Teeka had run
quickly in and snatched up her balu.  Now she sat upon a high branch,
safe out of harm's way, cuddling the little thing close to her hairy
breast, the while her savage little eyes bored down upon the
contestants in the clearing, and her ferocious voice urged Taug and the
other bulls to leap into the melee.

Thus goaded the bulls came closer, redoubling their hideous clamor; but
Sheeta was already sufficiently engaged--he did not even hear them.
Once he succeeded in partially dislodging the ape-man from his back, so
that Tarzan swung for an instant in front of those awful talons, and in
the brief instant before he could regain his former hold, a raking blow
from a hind paw laid open one leg from hip to knee.


It was the sight and smell of this blood, possibly, which wrought upon
the encircling apes; but it was Taug who really was responsible for the
thing they did.

Taug, but a moment before filled with rage toward Tarzan of the Apes,
stood close to the battling pair, his red-rimmed, wicked little eyes
glaring at them.  What was passing in his savage brain? Did he gloat
over the unenviable position of his recent tormentor? Did he long to
see Sheeta's great fangs sink into the soft throat of the ape-man? Or
did he realize the courageous unselfishness that had prompted Tarzan to
rush to the rescue and imperil his life for Teeka's balu--for Taug's
little balu? Is gratitude a possession of man only, or do the lower
orders know it also?

With the spilling of Tarzan's blood, Taug answered these questions.
With all the weight of his great body he leaped, hideously growling,
upon Sheeta.  His long fighting fangs buried themselves in the white
throat.  His powerful arms beat and clawed at the soft fur until it
flew upward in the jungle breeze.

And with Taug's example before them the other bulls charged, burying
Sheeta beneath rending fangs and filling all the forest with the wild
din of their battle cries.

Ah! but it was a wondrous and inspiring sight--this battle of the
primordial apes and the great, white ape-man with their ancestral foe,
Sheeta, the panther.

In frenzied excitement, Teeka fairly danced upon the limb which swayed
beneath her great weight as she urged on the males of her people, and
Thaka, and Mumga, and Kamma, with the other shes of the tribe of
Kerchak, added their shrill cries or fierce barkings to the pandemonium
which now reigned within the jungle.

Bitten and biting, tearing and torn, Sheeta battled for his life; but
the odds were against him.  Even Numa, the lion, would have hesitated
to have attacked an equal number of the great bulls of the tribe of
Kerchak, and now, a half mile away, hearing the sounds of the terrific
battle, the king of beasts rose uneasily from his midday slumber and
slunk off farther into the jungle.

Presently Sheeta's torn and bloody body ceased its titanic struggles.
It stiffened spasmodically, twitched and was still, yet the bulls
continued to lacerate it until the beautiful coat was torn to shreds.
At last they desisted from sheer physical weariness, and then from the
tangle of bloody bodies rose a crimson giant, straight as an arrow.

He placed a foot upon the dead body of the panther, and lifting his
blood-stained face to the blue of the equatorial heavens, gave voice to
the horrid victory cry of the bull ape.

One by one his hairy fellows of the tribe of Kerchak followed his
example.  The shes came down from their perches of safety and struck
and reviled the dead body of Sheeta.  The young apes refought the
battle in mimicry of their mighty elders.

Teeka was quite close to Tarzan.  He turned and saw her with the balu
hugged close to her hairy breast, and put out his hands to take the
little one, expecting that Teeka would bare her fangs and spring upon
him; but instead she placed the balu in his arms, and coming nearer,
licked his frightful wounds.

And presently Taug, who had escaped with only a few scratches, came and
squatted beside Tarzan and watched him as he played with the little
balu, and at last he too leaned over and helped Teeka with the
cleansing and the healing of the ape-man's hurts.




                           4

                   The God of Tarzan

AMONG THE BOOKS of his dead father in the little cabin by the
land-locked harbor, Tarzan of the Apes found many things to puzzle his
young head.  By much labor and through the medium of infinite patience
as well, he had, without assistance, discovered the purpose of the
little bugs which ran riot upon the printed pages.  He had learned that
in the many combinations in which he found them they spoke in a silent
language, spoke in a strange tongue, spoke of wonderful things which a
little ape-boy could not by any chance fully understand, arousing his
curiosity, stimulating his imagination and filling his soul with a
mighty longing for further knowledge.

A dictionary had proven itself a wonderful storehouse of information,
when, after several years of tireless endeavor, he had solved the
mystery of its purpose and the manner of its use.  He had learned to
make a species of game out of it, following up the spoor of a new
thought through the mazes of the many definitions which each new word
required him to consult.  It was like following a quarry through the
jungle--it was hunting, and Tarzan of the Apes was an indefatigable
huntsman.

There were, of course, certain words which aroused his curiosity to a
greater extent than others, words which, for one reason or another,
excited his imagination.  There was one, for example, the meaning of
which was rather difficult to grasp.  It was the word GOD.  Tarzan
first had been attracted to it by the fact that it was very short and
that it commenced with a larger g-bug than those about it--a male g-bug
it was to Tarzan, the lower-case letters being females.  Another fact
which attracted him to this word was the number of he-bugs which
figured in its definition--Supreme Deity, Creator or Upholder of the
Universe.  This must be a very important word indeed, he would have to
look into it, and he did, though it still baffled him after many months
of thought and study.

However, Tarzan counted no time wasted which he devoted to these
strange hunting expeditions into the game preserves of knowledge, for
each word and each definition led on and on into strange places, into
new worlds where, with increasing frequency, he met old, familiar
faces.  And always he added to his store of knowledge.

But of the meaning of GOD he was yet in doubt.  Once he thought he had
grasped it--that God was a mighty chieftain, king of all the Mangani.
He was not quite sure, however, since that would mean that God was
mightier than Tarzan--a point which Tarzan of the Apes, who
acknowledged no equal in the jungle, was loath to concede.

But in all the books he had there was no picture of God, though he
found much to confirm his belief that God was a great, an all-powerful
individual.  He saw pictures of places where God was worshiped; but
never any sign of God.  Finally he began to wonder if God were not of a
different form than he, and at last he determined to set out in search
of Him.

He commenced by questioning Mumga, who was very old and had seen many
strange things in her long life; but Mumga, being an ape, had a faculty
for recalling the trivial.  That time when Gunto mistook a sting-bug
for an edible beetle had made more impression upon Mumga than all the
innumerable manifestations of the greatness of God which she had
witnessed, and which, of course, she had not understood.

Numgo, overhearing Tarzan's questions, managed to wrest his attention
long enough from the diversion of flea hunting to advance the theory
that the power which made the lightning and the rain and the thunder
came from Goro, the moon.  He knew this, he said, because the Dum-Dum
always was danced in the light of Goro.  This reasoning, though
entirely satisfactory to Numgo and Mumga, failed fully to convince
Tarzan.  However, it gave him a basis for further investigation along a
new line.  He would investigate the moon.

That night he clambered to the loftiest pinnacle of the tallest jungle
giant.  The moon was full, a great, glorious, equatorial moon.  The
ape-man, upright upon a slender, swaying limb, raised his bronzed face
to the silver orb.  Now that he had clambered to the highest point
within his reach, he discovered, to his surprise, that Goro was as far
away as when he viewed him from the ground.  He thought that Goro was
attempting to elude him.

"Come, Goro!" he cried, "Tarzan of the Apes will not harm you!" But
still the moon held aloof.

"Tell me," he continued, "if you be the great king who sends Ara, the
lightning; who makes the great noise and the mighty winds, and sends
the waters down upon the jungle people when the days are dark and it is
cold.  Tell me, Goro, are you God?"

Of course he did not pronounce God as you or I would pronounce His
name, for Tarzan knew naught of the spoken language of his English
forbears; but he had a name of his own invention for each of the little
bugs which constituted the alphabet.  Unlike the apes he was not
satisfied merely to have a mental picture of the things he knew, he
must have a word descriptive of each.  In reading he grasped a word in
its entirety; but when he spoke the words he had learned from the books
of his father, he pronounced each according to the names he had given
the various little bugs which occurred in it, usually giving the gender
prefix for each.

Thus it was an imposing word which Tarzan made of GOD.  The masculine
prefix of the apes is BU, the feminine MU; g Tarzan had named LA, o he
pronounced TU, and d was MO. So the word God evolved itself into
BULAMUTUMUMO, or, in English, he-g-she-o-she-d.

Similarly he had arrived at a strange and wonderful spelling of his own
name.  Tarzan is derived from the two ape words TAR and ZAN, meaning
white skin.  It was given him by his foster mother, Kala, the great
she-ape. When Tarzan first put it into the written language of his own
people he had not yet chanced upon either WHITE or SKIN in the
dictionary; but in a primer he had seen the picture of a little white
boy and so he wrote his name BUMUDE-MUTOMURO, or he-boy.

To follow Tarzan's strange system of spelling would be laborious as
well as futile, and so we shall in the future, as we have in the past,
adhere to the more familiar forms of our grammar school copybooks.  It
would tire you to remember that DO meant b, TU o, and RO y, and that to
say he-boy you must prefix the ape masculine gender sound BU before the
entire word and the feminine gender sound MU before each of the
lower-case letters which go to make up boy--it would tire you and it
would bring me to the nineteenth hole several strokes under par.

And so Tarzan harangued the moon, and when Goro did not reply, Tarzan
of the Apes waxed wroth.  He swelled his giant chest and bared his
fighting fangs, and hurled into the teeth of the dead satellite the
challenge of the bull ape.

"You are not Bulamutumumo," he cried.  "You are not king of the jungle
folk.  You are not so great as Tarzan, mighty fighter, mighty hunter.
None there is so great as Tarzan.  If there be a Bulamutumumo, Tarzan
can kill him.  Come down, Goro, great coward, and fight with Tarzan.
Tarzan will kill you.  I am Tarzan, the killer."

But the moon made no answer to the boasting of the ape-man, and when a
cloud came and obscured her face, Tarzan thought that Goro was indeed
afraid, and was hiding from him, so he came down out of the trees and
awoke Numgo and told him how great was Tarzan--how he had frightened
Goro out of the sky and made him tremble.  Tarzan spoke of the moon as
HE, for all things large or awe inspiring are male to the ape folk.

Numgo was not much impressed; but he was very sleepy, so he told Tarzan
to go away and leave his betters alone.

"But where shall I find God?" insisted Tarzan.  "You are very old; if
there is a God you must have seen Him.  What does He look like? Where
does He live?"

"I am God," replied Numgo.  "Now sleep and disturb me no more."

Tarzan looked at Numgo steadily for several minutes, his shapely head
sank just a trifle between his great shoulders, his square chin shot
forward and his short upper lip drew back, exposing his white teeth.
Then, with a low growl he leaped upon the ape and buried his fangs in
the other's hairy shoulder, clutching the great neck in his mighty
fingers.  Twice he shook the old ape, then he released his tooth-hold.

"Are you God?" he demanded.

"No," wailed Numgo.  "I am only a poor, old ape.  Leave me alone.  Go
ask the Gomangani where God is.  They are hairless like yourself and
very wise, too.  They should know."

Tarzan released Numgo and turned away.  The suggestion that he consult
the blacks appealed to him, and though his relations with the people of
Mbonga, the chief, were the antithesis of friendly, he could at least
spy upon his hated enemies and discover if they had intercourse with
God.

So it was that Tarzan set forth through the trees toward the village of
the blacks, all excitement at the prospect of discovering the Supreme
Being, the Creator of all things.  As he traveled he reviewed,
mentally, his armament--the condition of his hunting knife, the number
of his arrows, the newness of the gut which strung his bow--he hefted
the war spear which had once been the pride of some black warrior of
Mbonga's tribe.

If he met God, Tarzan would be prepared.  One could never tell whether
a grass rope, a war spear, or a poisoned arrow would be most
efficacious against an unfamiliar foe.  Tarzan of the Apes was quite
content--if God wished to fight, the ape-man had no doubt as to the
outcome of the struggle.  There were many questions Tarzan wished to
put to the Creator of the Universe and so he hoped that God would not
prove a belligerent God; but his experience of life and the ways of
living things had taught him that any creature with the means for
offense and defense was quite likely to provoke attack if in the proper
mood.

It was dark when Tarzan came to the village of Mbonga.  As silently as
the silent shadows of the night he sought his accustomed place among
the branches of the great tree which overhung the palisade.  Below him,
in the village street, he saw men and women.  The men were hideously
painted--more hideously than usual.  Among them moved a weird and
grotesque figure, a tall figure that went upon the two legs of a man
and yet had the head of a buffalo.  A tail dangled to his ankles behind
him, and in one hand he carried a zebra's tail while the other clutched
a bunch of small arrows.

Tarzan was electrified.  Could it be that chance had given him thus
early an opportunity to look upon God? Surely this thing was neither
man nor beast, so what could it be then other than the Creator of the
Universe! The ape-man watched the every move of the strange creature.
He saw the black men and women fall back at its approach as though they
stood in terror of its mysterious powers.

Presently he discovered that the deity was speaking and that all
listened in silence to his words.  Tarzan was sure that none other than
God could inspire such awe in the hearts of the Gomangani, or stop
their mouths so effectually without recourse to arrows or spears.
Tarzan had come to look with contempt upon the blacks, principally
because of their garrulity.  The small apes talked a great deal and ran
away from an enemy.  The big, old bulls of Kerchak talked but little
and fought upon the slightest provocation.  Numa, the lion, was not
given to loquacity, yet of all the jungle folk there were few who
fought more often than he.

Tarzan witnessed strange things that night, none of which he
understood, and, perhaps because they were strange, he thought that
they must have to do with the God he could not understand.  He saw
three youths receive their first war spears in a weird ceremony which
the grotesque witch-doctor strove successfully to render uncanny and
awesome.

Hugely interested, he watched the slashing of the three brown arms and
the exchange of blood with Mbonga, the chief, in the rites of the
ceremony of blood brotherhood.  He saw the zebra's tail dipped into a
caldron of water above which the witch-doctor had made magical passes
the while he danced and leaped about it, and he saw the breasts and
foreheads of each of the three novitiates sprinkled with the charmed
liquid.  Could the ape-man have known the purpose of this act, that it
was intended to render the recipient invulnerable to the attacks of his
enemies and fearless in the face of any danger, he would doubtless have
leaped into the village street and appropriated the zebra's tail and a
portion of the contents of the caldron.

But he did not know, and so he only wondered, not alone at what he saw
but at the strange sensations which played up and down his naked spine,
sensations induced, doubtless, by the same hypnotic influence which
held the black spectators in tense awe upon the verge of a hysteric
upheaval.

The longer Tarzan watched, the more convinced he became that his eyes
were upon God, and with the conviction came determination to have word
with the deity.  With Tarzan of the Apes, to think was to act.

The people of Mbonga were keyed to the highest pitch of hysterical
excitement.  They needed little to release the accumulated pressure of
static nerve force which the terrorizing mummery of the witch-doctor
had induced.

A lion roared, suddenly and loud, close without the palisade.  The
blacks started nervously, dropping into utter silence as they listened
for a repetition of that all-too-familiar and always terrorizing voice.
Even the witch-doctor paused in the midst of an intricate step,
remaining momentarily rigid and statuesque as he plumbed his cunning
mind for a suggestion as how best he might take advantage of the
condition of his audience and the timely interruption.

Already the evening had been vastly profitable to him.  There would be
three goats for the initiation of the three youths into full-fledged
warriorship, and besides these he had received several gifts of grain
and beads, together with a piece of copper wire from admiring and
terrified members of his audience.

Numa's roar still reverberated along taut nerves when a woman's laugh,
shrill and piercing, shattered the silence of the village.  It was this
moment that Tarzan chose to drop lightly from his tree into the village
street.  Fearless among his blood enemies he stood, taller by a full
head than many of Mbonga's warriors, straight as their straightest
arrow, muscled like Numa, the lion.

For a moment Tarzan stood looking straight at the witch-doctor. Every
eye was upon him, yet no one had moved--a paralysis of terror held
them, to be broken a moment later as the ape-man, with a toss of head,
stepped straight toward the hideous figure beneath the buffalo head.

Then the nerves of the blacks could stand no more.  For months the
terror of the strange, white, jungle god had been upon them.  Their
arrows had been stolen from the very center of the village; their
warriors had been silently slain upon the jungle trails and their dead
bodies dropped mysteriously and by night into the village street as
from the heavens above.

One or two there were who had glimpsed the strange figure of the new
demon and it was from their oft-repeated descriptions that the entire
village now recognized Tarzan as the author of many of their ills.
Upon another occasion and by daylight, the warriors would doubtless
have leaped to attack him, but at night, and this night of all others,
when they were wrought to such a pitch of nervous dread by the uncanny
artistry of their witch-doctor, they were helpless with terror.  As one
man they turned and fled, scattering for their huts, as Tarzan
advanced.  For a moment one and one only held his ground.  It was the
witch-doctor. More than half self-hypnotized into a belief in his own
charlatanry he faced this new demon who threatened to undermine his
ancient and lucrative profession.


"Are you God?" asked Tarzan.

The witch-doctor, having no idea of the meaning of the other's words,
danced a few strange steps, leaped high in the air, turning completely
around and alighting in a stooping posture with feet far outspread and
head thrust out toward the ape-man. Thus he remained for an instant
before he uttered a loud "Boo!" which was evidently intended to
frighten Tarzan away; but in reality had no such effect.

Tarzan did not pause.  He had set out to approach and examine God and
nothing upon earth might now stay his feet.  Seeing that his antics had
no potency with the visitor, the witch-doctor tried some new medicine.
Spitting upon the zebra's tail, which he still clutched in one hand, he
made circles above it with the arrows in the other hand, meanwhile
backing cautiously away from Tarzan and speaking confidentially to the
bushy end of the tail.

This medicine must be short medicine, however, for the creature, god or
demon, was steadily closing up the distance which had separated them.
The circles therefore were few and rapid, and when they were completed,
the witch-doctor struck an attitude which was intended to be awe
inspiring and waving the zebra's tail before him, drew an imaginary
line between himself and Tarzan.

"Beyond this line you cannot pass, for my medicine is strong medicine,"
he cried.  "Stop, or you will fall dead as your foot touches this spot.
My mother was a voodoo, my father was a snake; I live upon lions'
hearts and the entrails of the panther; I eat young babies for
breakfast and the demons of the jungle are my slaves.  I am the most
powerful witch-doctor in the world; I fear nothing, for I cannot die.
I--" But he got no further; instead he turned and fled as Tarzan of the
Apes crossed the magical dead line and still lived.

As the witch-doctor ran, Tarzan almost lost his temper.  This was no
way for God to act, at least not in accordance with the conception
Tarzan had come to have of God.

"Come back!" he cried.  "Come back, God, I will not harm you." But the
witch-doctor was in full retreat by this time, stepping high as he
leaped over cooking pots and the smoldering embers of small fires that
had burned before the huts of villagers.  Straight for his own hut ran
the witch-doctor, terror-spurred to unwonted speed; but futile was his
effort--the ape-man bore down upon him with the speed of Bara, the deer.

Just at the entrance to his hut the witch-doctor was overhauled.  A
heavy hand fell upon his shoulder to drag him back.  It seized upon a
portion of the buffalo hide, dragging the disguise from him.  It was a
naked black man that Tarzan saw dodge into the darkness of the hut's
interior.

So this was what he had thought was God! Tarzan's lip curled in an
angry snarl as he leaped into the hut after the terror-stricken
witch-doctor. In the blackness within he found the man huddled at the
far side and dragged him forth into the comparative lightness of the
moonlit night.

The witch-doctor bit and scratched in an attempt to escape; but a few
cuffs across the head brought him to a better realization of the
futility of resistance.  Beneath the moon Tarzan held the cringing
figure upon its shaking feet.

"So you are God!" he cried.  "If you be God, then Tarzan is greater
than God," and so the ape-man thought.  "I am Tarzan," he shouted into
the ear of the black.  "In all the jungle, or above it, or upon the
running waters, or the sleeping waters, or upon the big water, or the
little water, there is none so great as Tarzan.  Tarzan is greater than
the Mangani; he is greater than the Gomangani.  With his own hands he
has slain Numa, the lion, and Sheeta, the panther; there is none so
great as Tarzan.  Tarzan is greater than God.  See!" and with a sudden
wrench he twisted the black's neck until the fellow shrieked in pain
and then slumped to the earth in a swoon.

Placing his foot upon the neck of the fallen witch-doctor, the ape-man
raised his face to the moon and uttered the long, shrill scream of the
victorious bull ape.  Then he stooped and snatched the zebra's tail
from the nerveless fingers of the unconscious man and without a
backward glance retraced his footsteps across the village.

From several hut doorways frightened eyes watched him.  Mbonga, the
chief, was one of those who had seen what passed before the hut of the
witch-doctor. Mbonga was greatly concerned.  Wise old patriarch that he
was, he never had more than half believed in witch-doctors, at least
not since greater wisdom had come with age; but as a chief he was well
convinced of the power of the witch-doctor as an arm of government, and
often it was that Mbonga used the superstitious fears of his people to
his own ends through the medium of the medicine-man.

Mbonga and the witch-doctor had worked together and divided the spoils,
and now the "face" of the witch-doctor would be lost forever if any saw
what Mbonga had seen; nor would this generation again have as much
faith in any future witch-doctor.

Mbonga must do something to counteract the evil influence of the forest
demon's victory over the witch-doctor. He raised his heavy spear and
crept silently from his hut in the wake of the retreating ape-man. Down
the village street walked Tarzan, as unconcerned and as deliberate as
though only the friendly apes of Kerchak surrounded him instead of a
village full of armed enemies.

Seeming only was the indifference of Tarzan, for alert and watchful was
every well-trained sense.  Mbonga, wily stalker of keen-eared jungle
creatures, moved now in utter silence.  Not even Bara, the deer, with
his great ears could have guessed from any sound that Mbonga was near;
but the black was not stalking Bara; he was stalking man, and so he
sought only to avoid noise.

Closer and closer to the slowly moving ape-man he came.  Now he raised
his war spear, throwing his spear-hand far back above his right
shoulder.  Once and for all would Mbonga, the chief, rid himself and
his people of the menace of this terrifying enemy.  He would make no
poor cast; he would take pains, and he would hurl his weapon with such
great force as would finish the demon forever.

But Mbonga, sure as he thought himself, erred in his calculations.  He
might believe that he was stalking a man--he did not know, however,
that it was a man with the delicate sense perception of the lower
orders.  Tarzan, when he had turned his back upon his enemies, had
noted what Mbonga never would have thought of considering in the
hunting of man--the wind.  It was blowing in the same direction that
Tarzan was proceeding, carrying to his delicate nostrils the odors
which arose behind him.  Thus it was that Tarzan knew that he was being
followed, for even among the many stenches of an African village, the
ape-man's uncanny faculty was equal to the task of differentiating one
stench from another and locating with remarkable precision the source
from whence it came.

He knew that a man was following him and coming closer, and his
judgment warned him of the purpose of the stalker.  When Mbonga,
therefore, came within spear range of the ape-man, the latter suddenly
wheeled upon him, so suddenly that the poised spear was shot a fraction
of a second before Mbonga had intended.  It went a trifle high and
Tarzan stooped to let it pass over his head; then he sprang toward the
chief.  But Mbonga did not wait to receive him.  Instead, he turned and
fled for the dark doorway of the nearest hut, calling as he went for
his warriors to fall upon the stranger and slay him.

Well indeed might Mbonga scream for help, for Tarzan, young and
fleet-footed, covered the distance between them in great leaps, at the
speed of a charging lion.  He was growling, too, not at all unlike Numa
himself.  Mbonga heard and his blood ran cold.  He could feel the wool
stiffen upon his pate and a prickly chill run up his spine, as though
Death had come and run his cold finger along Mbonga's back.

Others heard, too, and saw, from the darkness of their huts--bold
warriors, hideously painted, grasping heavy war spears in nerveless
fingers.  Against Numa, the lion, they would have charged fearlessly.
Against many times their own number of black warriors would they have
raced to the protection of their chief; but this weird jungle demon
filled them with terror.  There was nothing human in the bestial growls
that rumbled up from his deep chest; there was nothing human in the
bared fangs, or the catlike leaps.

Mbonga's warriors were terrified--too terrified to leave the seeming
security of their huts while they watched the beast-man spring full
upon the back of their old chieftain.

Mbonga went down with a scream of terror.  He was too frightened even
to attempt to defend himself.  He just lay beneath his antagonist in a
paralysis of fear, screaming at the top of his lungs.  Tarzan half rose
and kneeled above the black.  He turned Mbonga over and looked him in
the face, exposing the man's throat, then he drew his long, keen knife,
the knife that John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, had brought from England
many years before.  He raised it close above Mbonga's neck.  The old
black whimpered with terror.  He pleaded for his life in a tongue which
Tarzan could not understand.

For the first time the ape-man had a close view of the chief.  He saw
an old man, a very old man with scrawny neck and wrinkled face--a
dried, parchment-like face which resembled some of the little monkeys
Tarzan knew so well.  He saw the terror in the man's eyes--never before
had Tarzan seen such terror in the eyes of any animal, or such a
piteous appeal for mercy upon the face of any creature.

Something stayed the ape-man's hand for an instant.  He wondered why it
was that he hesitated to make the kill; never before had he thus
delayed.  The old man seemed to wither and shrink to a bag of puny
bones beneath his eyes.  So weak and helpless and terror-stricken he
appeared that the ape-man was filled with a great contempt; but another
sensation also claimed him--something new to Tarzan of the Apes in
relation to an enemy.  It was pity--pity for a poor, frightened, old
man.

Tarzan rose and turned away, leaving Mbonga, the chief, unharmed.

With head held high the ape-man walked through the village, swung
himself into the branches of the tree which overhung the palisade and
disappeared from the sight of the villagers.

All the way back to the stamping ground of the apes, Tarzan sought for
an explanation of the strange power which had stayed his hand and
prevented him from slaying Mbonga.  It was as though someone greater
than he had commanded him to spare the life of the old man.  Tarzan
could not understand, for he could conceive of nothing, or no one, with
the authority to dictate to him what he should do, or what he should
refrain from doing.

It was late when Tarzan sought a swaying couch among the trees beneath
which slept the apes of Kerchak, and he was still absorbed in the
solution of his strange problem when he fell asleep.

The sun was well up in the heavens when he awoke.  The apes were astir
in search of food.  Tarzan watched them lazily from above as they
scratched in the rotting loam for bugs and beetles and grubworms, or
sought among the branches of the trees for eggs and young birds, or
luscious caterpillars.

An orchid, dangling close beside his head, opened slowly, unfolding its
delicate petals to the warmth and light of the sun which but recently
had penetrated to its shady retreat.  A thousand times had Tarzan of
the Apes witnessed the beauteous miracle; but now it aroused a keener
interest, for the ape-man was just commencing to ask himself questions
about all the myriad wonders which heretofore he had but taken for
granted.

What made the flower open? What made it grow from a tiny bud to a
full-blown bloom? Why was it at all? Why was he?  Where did Numa, the
lion, come from? Who planted the first tree? How did Goro get way up
into the darkness of the night sky to cast his welcome light upon the
fearsome nocturnal jungle? And the sun! Did the sun merely happen there?

Why were all the peoples of the jungle not trees? Why were the trees
not something else? Why was Tarzan different from Taug, and Taug
different from Bara, the deer, and Bara different from Sheeta, the
panther, and why was not Sheeta like Buto, the rhinoceros? Where and
how, anyway, did they all come from--the trees, the flowers, the
insects, the countless creatures of the jungle?

Quite unexpectedly an idea popped into Tarzan's head.  In following out
the many ramifications of the dictionary definition of GOD he had come
upon the word CREATE--"to cause to come into existence; to form out of
nothing."

Tarzan almost had arrived at something tangible when a distant wail
startled him from his preoccupation into sensibility of the present and
the real.  The wail came from the jungle at some little distance from
Tarzan's swaying couch.  It was the wail of a tiny balu.  Tarzan
recognized it at once as the voice of Gazan, Teeka's baby.  They had
called it Gazan because its soft, baby hair had been unusually red, and
GAZAN in the language of the great apes, means red skin.

The wail was immediately followed by a real scream of terror from the
small lungs.  Tarzan was electrified into instant action.  Like an
arrow from a bow he shot through the trees in the direction of the
sound.  Ahead of him he heard the savage snarling of an adult she-ape.
It was Teeka to the rescue.  The danger must be very real.  Tarzan
could tell that by the note of rage mingled with fear in the voice of
the she.

Running along bending limbs, swinging from one tree to another, the
ape-man raced through the middle terraces toward the sounds which now
had risen in volume to deafening proportions.  From all directions the
apes of Kerchak were hurrying in response to the appeal in the tones of
the balu and its mother, and as they came, their roars reverberated
through the forest.

But Tarzan, swifter than his heavy fellows, distanced them all.  It was
he who was first upon the scene.  What he saw sent a cold chill through
his giant frame, for the enemy was the most hated and loathed of all
the jungle creatures.

Twined in a great tree was Histah, the snake--huge, ponderous,
slimy--and in the folds of its deadly embrace was Teeka's little balu,
Gazan.  Nothing in the jungle inspired within the breast of Tarzan so
near a semblance to fear as did the hideous Histah.  The apes, too,
loathed the terrifying reptile and feared him even more than they did
Sheeta, the panther, or Numa, the lion.  Of all their enemies there was
none they gave a wider berth than they gave Histah, the snake.

Tarzan knew that Teeka was peculiarly fearful of this silent, repulsive
foe, and as the scene broke upon his vision, it was the action of Teeka
which filled him with the greatest wonder, for at the moment that he
saw her, the she-ape leaped upon the glistening body of the snake, and
as the mighty folds encircled her as well as her offspring, she made no
effort to escape, but instead grasped the writhing body in a futile
effort to tear it from her screaming balu.

Tarzan knew all too well how deep-rooted was Teeka's terror of Histah.
He scarce could believe the testimony of his own eyes then, when they
told him that she had voluntarily rushed into that deadly embrace.  Nor
was Teeka's innate dread of the monster much greater than Tarzan's own.
Never, willingly, had he touched a snake.  Why, he could not say, for
he would admit fear of nothing; nor was it fear, but rather an inherent
repulsion bequeathed to him by many generations of civilized ancestors,
and back of them, perhaps, by countless myriads of such as Teeka, in
the breasts of each of which had lurked the same nameless terror of the
slimy reptile.

Yet Tarzan did not hesitate more than had Teeka, but leaped upon Histah
with all the speed and impetuosity that he would have shown had he been
springing upon Bara, the deer, to make a kill for food.  Thus beset the
snake writhed and twisted horribly; but not for an instant did it loose
its hold upon any of its intended victims, for it had included the
ape-man in its cold embrace the minute that he had fallen upon it.

Still clinging to the tree, the mighty reptile held the three as though
they had been without weight, the while it sought to crush the life
from them.  Tarzan had drawn his knife and this he now plunged rapidly
into the body of the enemy; but the encircling folds promised to sap
his life before he had inflicted a death wound upon the snake.  Yet on
he fought, nor once did he seek to escape the horrid death that
confronted him--his sole aim was to slay Histah and thus free Teeka and
her balu.

The great, wide-gaping jaws of the snake turned and hovered above him.
The elastic maw, which could accommodate a rabbit or a horned buck with
equal facility, yawned for him; but Histah, in turning his attention
upon the ape-man, brought his head within reach of Tarzan's blade.
Instantly a brown hand leaped forth and seized the mottled neck, and
another drove the heavy hunting knife to the hilt into the little brain.

Convulsively Histah shuddered and relaxed, tensed and relaxed again,
whipping and striking with his great body; but no longer sentient or
sensible.  Histah was dead, but in his death throes he might easily
dispatch a dozen apes or men.

Quickly Tarzan seized Teeka and dragged her from the loosened embrace,
dropping her to the ground beneath, then he extricated the balu and
tossed it to its mother.  Still Histah whipped about, clinging to the
ape-man; but after a dozen efforts Tarzan succeeded in wriggling free
and leaping to the ground out of range of the mighty battering of the
dying snake.

A circle of apes surrounded the scene of the battle; but the moment
that Tarzan broke safely from the enemy they turned silently away to
resume their interrupted feeding, and Teeka turned with them,
apparently forgetful of all but her balu and the fact that when the
interruption had occurred she just had discovered an ingeniously hidden
nest containing three perfectly good eggs.

Tarzan, equally indifferent to a battle that was over, merely cast a
parting glance at the still writhing body of Histah and wandered off
toward the little pool which served to water the tribe at this point.
Strangely, he did not give the victory cry over the vanquished Histah.
Why, he could not have told you, other than that to him Histah was not
an animal.  He differed in some peculiar way from the other denizens of
the jungle.  Tarzan only knew that he hated him.

At the pool Tarzan drank his fill and lay stretched upon the soft grass
beneath the shade of a tree.  His mind reverted to the battle with
Histah, the snake.  It seemed strange to him that Teeka should have
placed herself within the folds of the horrid monster.  Why had she
done it? Why, indeed, had he? Teeka did not belong to him, nor did
Teeka's balu.  They were both Taug's. Why then had he done this thing?
Histah was not food for him when he was dead.  There seemed to Tarzan,
now that he gave the matter thought, no reason in the world why he
should have done the thing he did, and presently it occurred to him
that he had acted almost involuntarily, just as he had acted when he
had released the old Gomangani the previous evening.

What made him do such things? Somebody more powerful than he must force
him to act at times.  "All-powerful," thought Tarzan.  "The little bugs
say that God is all-powerful. It must be that God made me do these
things, for I never did them by myself.  It was God who made Teeka rush
upon Histah.  Teeka would never go near Histah of her own volition.  It
was God who held my knife from the throat of the old Gomangani.  God
accomplishes strange things for he is 'all-powerful.' I cannot see Him;
but I know that it must be God who does these things.  No Mangani, no
Gomangani, no Tarmangani could do them."

And the flowers--who made them grow? Ah, now it was all explained--the
flowers, the trees, the moon, the sun, himself, every living creature
in the jungle--they were all made by God out of nothing.

And what was God? What did God look like? Of that he had no conception;
but he was sure that everything that was good came from God.  His good
act in refraining from slaying the poor, defenseless old Gomangani;
Teeka's love that had hurled her into the embrace of death; his own
loyalty to Teeka which had jeopardized his life that she might live.
The flowers and the trees were good and beautiful.  God had made them.
He made the other creatures, too, that each might have food upon which
to live.  He had made Sheeta, the panther, with his beautiful coat; and
Numa, the lion, with his noble head and his shaggy mane.  He had made
Bara, the deer, lovely and graceful.

Yes, Tarzan had found God, and he spent the whole day in attributing to
Him all of the good and beautiful things of nature; but there was one
thing which troubled him.  He could not quite reconcile it to his
conception of his new-found God.

Who made Histah, the snake?




                           5

               Tarzan and the Black Boy

TARZAN OF THE Apes sat at the foot of a great tree braiding a new grass
rope.  Beside him lay the frayed remnants of the old one, torn and
severed by the fangs and talons of Sheeta, the panther.  Only half the
original rope was there, the balance having been carried off by the
angry cat as he bounded away through the jungle with the noose still
about his savage neck and the loose end dragging among the underbrush.

Tarzan smiled as he recalled Sheeta's great rage, his frantic efforts
to free himself from the entangling strands, his uncanny screams that
were part hate, part anger, part terror.  He smiled in retrospection at
the discomfiture of his enemy, and in anticipation of another day as he
added an extra strand to his new rope.

This would be the strongest, the heaviest rope that Tarzan of the Apes
ever had fashioned.  Visions of Numa, the lion, straining futilely in
its embrace thrilled the ape-man. He was quite content, for his hands
and his brain were busy.  Content, too, were his fellows of the tribe
of Kerchak, searching for food in the clearing and the surrounding
trees about him.  No perplexing thoughts of the future burdened their
minds, and only occasionally, dimly arose recollections of the near
past.  They were stimulated to a species of brutal content by the
delectable business of filling their bellies.  Afterward they would
sleep--it was their life, and they enjoyed it as we enjoy ours, you and
I--as Tarzan enjoyed his.  Possibly they enjoyed theirs more than we
enjoy ours, for who shall say that the beasts of the jungle do not
better fulfill the purposes for which they are created than does man
with his many excursions into strange fields and his contraventions of
the laws of nature? And what gives greater content and greater
happiness than the fulfilling of a destiny?

As Tarzan worked, Gazan, Teeka's little balu, played about him while
Teeka sought food upon the opposite side of the clearing.  No more did
Teeka, the mother, or Taug, the sullen sire, harbor suspicions of
Tarzan's intentions toward their first-born. Had he not courted death
to save their Gazan from the fangs and talons of Sheeta? Did he not
fondle and cuddle the little one with even as great a show of affection
as Teeka herself displayed? Their fears were allayed and Tarzan now
found himself often in the role of nursemaid to a tiny anthropoid--an
avocation which he found by no means irksome, since Gazan was a
never-failing fount of surprises and entertainment.

Just now the apeling was developing those arboreal tendencies which
were to stand him in such good stead during the years of his youth,
when rapid flight into the upper terraces was of far more importance
and value than his undeveloped muscles and untried fighting fangs.
Backing off fifteen or twenty feet from the bole of the tree beneath
the branches of which Tarzan worked upon his rope, Gazan scampered
quickly forward, scrambling nimbly upward to the lower limbs.  Here he
would squat for a moment or two, quite proud of his achievement, then
clamber to the ground again and repeat.  Sometimes, quite often in
fact, for he was an ape, his attention was distracted by other things,
a beetle, a caterpillar, a tiny field mouse, and off he would go in
pursuit; the caterpillars he always caught, and sometimes the beetles;
but the field mice, never.

Now he discovered the tail of the rope upon which Tarzan was working.
Grasping it in one small hand he bounced away, for all the world like
an animated rubber ball, snatching it from the ape-man's hand and
running off across the clearing.  Tarzan leaped to his feet and was in
pursuit in an instant, no trace of anger on his face or in his voice as
he called to the roguish little balu to drop his rope.

Straight toward his mother raced Gazan, and after him came Tarzan.
Teeka looked up from her feeding, and in the first instant that she
realized that Gazan was fleeing and that another was in pursuit, she
bared her fangs and bristled; but when she saw that the pursuer was
Tarzan she turned back to the business that had been occupying her
attention.  At her very feet the ape-man overhauled the balu and,
though the youngster squealed and fought when Tarzan seized him, Teeka
only glanced casually in their direction.  No longer did she fear harm
to her first-born at the hands of the ape-man. Had he not saved Gazan
on two occasions?

Rescuing his rope, Tarzan returned to his tree and resumed his labor;
but thereafter it was necessary to watch carefully the playful balu,
who was now possessed to steal it whenever he thought his great,
smooth-skinned cousin was momentarily off his guard.

But even under this handicap Tarzan finally completed the rope, a long,
pliant weapon, stronger than any he ever had made before.  The
discarded piece of his former one he gave to Gazan for a plaything, for
Tarzan had it in his mind to instruct Teeka's balu after ideas of his
own when the youngster should be old and strong enough to profit by his
precepts.  At present the little ape's innate aptitude for mimicry
would be sufficient to familiarize him with Tarzan's ways and weapons,
and so the ape-man swung off into the jungle, his new rope coiled over
one shoulder, while little Gazan hopped about the clearing dragging the
old one after him in childish glee.

As Tarzan traveled, dividing his quest for food with one for a
sufficiently noble quarry whereupon to test his new weapon, his mind
often was upon Gazan.  The ape-man had realized a deep affection for
Teeka's balu almost from the first, partly because the child belonged
to Teeka, his first love, and partly for the little ape's own sake, and
Tarzan's human longing for some sentient creature upon which to expend
those natural affections of the soul which are inherent to all normal
members of the GENUS HOMO. Tarzan envied Teeka.  It was true that Gazan
evidenced a considerable reciprocation of Tarzan's fondness for him,
even preferring him to his own surly sire; but to Teeka the little one
turned when in pain or terror, when tired or hungry.  Then it was that
Tarzan felt quite alone in the world and longed desperately for one who
should turn first to him for succor and protection.

Taug had Teeka; Teeka had Gazan; and nearly every other bull and cow of
the tribe of Kerchak had one or more to love and by whom to be loved.
Of course Tarzan could scarcely formulate the thought in precisely this
way--he only knew that he craved something which was denied him;
something which seemed to be represented by those relations which
existed between Teeka and her balu, and so he envied Teeka and longed
for a balu of his own.

He saw Sheeta and his mate with their little family of three; and
deeper inland toward the rocky hills, where one might lie up during the
heat of the day, in the dense shade of a tangled thicket close under
the cool face of an overhanging rock, Tarzan had found the lair of
Numa, the lion, and of Sabor, the lioness.  Here he had watched them
with their little balus--playful creatures, spotted leopard-like. And
he had seen the young fawn with Bara, the deer, and with Buto, the
rhinoceros, its ungainly little one.  Each of the creatures of the
jungle had its own--except Tarzan.  It made the ape-man sad to think
upon this thing, sad and lonely; but presently the scent of game
cleared his young mind of all other considerations, as catlike he
crawled far out upon a bending limb above the game trail which led down
to the ancient watering place of the wild things of this wild world.

How many thousands of times had this great, old limb bent to the savage
form of some blood-thirsty hunter in the long years that it had spread
its leafy branches above the deep-worn jungle path! Tarzan, the
ape-man, Sheeta, the panther, and Histah, the snake, it knew well.
They had worn smooth the bark upon its upper surface.

Today it was Horta, the boar, which came down toward the watcher in the
old tree--Horta, the boar, whose formidable tusks and diabolical temper
preserved him from all but the most ferocious or most famished of the
largest carnivora.

But to Tarzan, meat was meat; naught that was edible or tasty might
pass a hungry Tarzan unchallenged and unattacked.  In hunger, as in
battle, the ape-man out-savaged the dreariest denizens of the jungle.
He knew neither fear nor mercy, except upon rare occasions when some
strange, inexplicable force stayed his hand--a force inexplicable to
him, perhaps, because of his ignorance of his own origin and of all the
forces of humanitarianism and civilization that were his rightful
heritage because of that origin.

So today, instead of staying his hand until a less formidable feast
found its way toward him, Tarzan dropped his new noose about the neck
of Horta, the boar.  It was an excellent test for the untried strands.
The angered boar bolted this way and that; but each time the new rope
held him where Tarzan had made it fast about the stem of the tree above
the branch from which he had cast it.

As Horta grunted and charged, slashing the sturdy jungle patriarch with
his mighty tusks until the bark flew in every direction, Tarzan dropped
to the ground behind him.  In the ape-man's hand was the long, keen
blade that had been his constant companion since that distant day upon
which chance had directed its point into the body of Bolgani, the
gorilla, and saved the torn and bleeding man-child from what else had
been certain death.

Tarzan walked in toward Horta, who swung now to face his enemy.  Mighty
and muscled as was the young giant, it yet would have appeared but the
maddest folly for him to face so formidable a creature as Horta, the
boar, armed only with a slender hunting knife.  So it would have seemed
to one who knew Horta even slightly and Tarzan not at all.

For a moment Horta stood motionless facing the ape-man.  His wicked,
deep-set eyes flashed angrily.  He shook his lowered head.

"Mud-eater!" jeered the ape-man. "Wallower in filth.  Even your meat
stinks, but it is juicy and makes Tarzan strong.  Today I shall eat
your heart, O Lord of the Great Tusks, that it shall keep savage that
which pounds against my own ribs."

Horta, understanding nothing of what Tarzan said, was none the less
enraged because of that.  He saw only a naked man-thing, hairless and
futile, pitting his puny fangs and soft muscles against his own
indomitable savagery, and he charged.

Tarzan of the Apes waited until the upcut of a wicked tusk would have
laid open his thigh, then he moved--just the least bit to one side; but
so quickly that lightning was a sluggard by comparison, and as he
moved, he stooped low and with all the great power of his right arm
drove the long blade of his father's hunting knife straight into the
heart of Horta, the boar.  A quick leap carried him from the zone of
the creature's death throes, and a moment later the hot and dripping
heart of Horta was in his grasp.

His hunger satisfied, Tarzan did not seek a lying-up place for sleep,
as was sometimes his way, but continued on through the jungle more in
search of adventure than of food, for today he was restless.  And so it
came that he turned his footsteps toward the village of Mbonga, the
black chief, whose people Tarzan had baited remorselessly since that
day upon which Kulonga, the chief's son, had slain Kala.

A river winds close beside the village of the black men.  Tarzan
reached its side a little below the clearing where squat the thatched
huts of the Negroes.  The river life was ever fascinating to the
ape-man. He found pleasure in watching the ungainly antics of Duro, the
hippopotamus, and keen sport in tormenting the sluggish crocodile,
Gimla, as he basked in the sun.  Then, too, there were the shes and the
balus of the black men of the Gomangani to frighten as they squatted by
the river, the shes with their meager washing, the balus with their
primitive toys.

This day he came upon a woman and her child farther down stream than
usual.  The former was searching for a species of shellfish which was
to be found in the mud close to the river bank.  She was a young black
woman of about thirty.  Her teeth were filed to sharp points, for her
people ate the flesh of man.  Her under lip was slit that it might
support a rude pendant of copper which she had worn for so many years
that the lip had been dragged downward to prodigious lengths, exposing
the teeth and gums of her lower jaw.  Her nose, too, was slit, and
through the slit was a wooden skewer.  Metal ornaments dangled from her
ears, and upon her forehead and cheeks; upon her chin and the bridge of
her nose were tattooings in colors that were mellowed now by age.  She
was naked except for a girdle of grasses about her waist.  Altogether
she was very beautiful in her own estimation and even in the estimation
of the men of Mbonga's tribe, though she was of another people--a
trophy of war seized in her maidenhood by one of Mbonga's fighting men.

Her child was a boy of ten, lithe, straight and, for a black, handsome.
Tarzan looked upon the two from the concealing foliage of a near-by
bush.  He was about to leap forth before them with a terrifying scream,
that he might enjoy the spectacle of their terror and their incontinent
flight; but of a sudden a new whim seized him.  Here was a balu
fashioned as he himself was fashioned.  Of course this one's skin was
black; but what of it?  Tarzan had never seen a white man.  In so far
as he knew, he was the sole representative of that strange form of life
upon the earth.  The black boy should make an excellent balu for
Tarzan, since he had none of his own.  He would tend him carefully,
feed him well, protect him as only Tarzan of the Apes could protect his
own, and teach him out of his half human, half bestial lore the secrets
of the jungle from its rotting surface vegetation to the high tossed
pinnacles of the forest's upper terraces.

* * *

Tarzan uncoiled his rope, and shook out the noose.  The two before him,
all ignorant of the near presence of that terrifying form, continued
preoccupied in the search for shellfish, poking about in the mud with
short sticks.

Tarzan stepped from the jungle behind them; his noose lay open upon the
ground beside him.  There was a quick movement of the right arm and the
noose rose gracefully into the air, hovered an instant above the head
of the unsuspecting youth, then settled.  As it encompassed his body
below the shoulders, Tarzan gave a quick jerk that tightened it about
the boy's arms, pinioning them to his sides.  A scream of terror broke
from the lad's lips, and as his mother turned, affrighted at his cry,
she saw him being dragged quickly toward a great white giant who stood
just beneath the shade of a near-by tree, scarcely a dozen long paces
from her.

With a savage cry of terror and rage, the woman leaped fearlessly
toward the ape-man. In her mien Tarzan saw determination and courage
which would shrink not even from death itself.  She was very hideous
and frightful even when her face was in repose; but convulsed by
passion, her expression became terrifyingly fiendish.  Even the ape-man
drew back, but more in revulsion than fear--fear he knew not.

Biting and kicking was the black she's balu as Tarzan tucked him
beneath his arm and vanished into the branches hanging low above him,
just as the infuriated mother dashed forward to seize and do battle
with him.  And as he melted away into the depth of the jungle with his
still struggling prize, he meditated upon the possibilities which might
lie in the prowess of the Gomangani were the hes as formidable as the
shes.

Once at a safe distance from the despoiled mother and out of earshot of
her screams and menaces, Tarzan paused to inspect his prize, now so
thoroughly terrorized that he had ceased his struggles and his outcries.

The frightened child rolled his eyes fearfully toward his captor, until
the whites showed gleaming all about the irises.

"I am Tarzan," said the ape-man, in the vernacular of the anthropoids.
"I will not harm you.  You are to be Tarzan's balu.  Tarzan will
protect you.  He will feed you.  The best in the jungle shall be for
Tarzan's balu, for Tarzan is a mighty hunter.  None need you fear, not
even Numa, the lion, for Tarzan is a mighty fighter.  None so great as
Tarzan, son of Kala.  Do not fear."

But the child only whimpered and trembled, for he did not understand
the tongue of the great apes, and the voice of Tarzan sounded to him
like the barking and growling of a beast.  Then, too, he had heard
stories of this bad, white forest god.  It was he who had slain Kulonga
and others of the warriors of Mbonga, the chief.  It was he who entered
the village stealthily, by magic, in the darkness of the night, to
steal arrows and poison, and frighten the women and the children and
even the great warriors.  Doubtless this wicked god fed upon little
boys.  Had his mother not said as much when he was naughty and she
threatened to give him to the white god of the jungle if he were not
good? Little black Tibo shook as with ague.

"Are you cold, Go-bu-balu?" asked Tarzan, using the simian equivalent
of black he-baby in lieu of a better name.  "The sun is hot; why do you
shiver?"

Tibo could not understand; but he cried for his mamma and begged the
great, white god to let him go, promising always to be a good boy
thereafter if his plea were granted.  Tarzan shook his head.  Not a
word could he understand.  This would never do! He must teach
Go-bu-balu a language which sounded like talk.  It was quite certain to
Tarzan that Go-bu-balu's speech was not talk at all.  It sounded quite
as senseless as the chattering of the silly birds.  It would be best,
thought the ape-man, quickly to get him among the tribe of Kerchak
where he would hear the Mangani talking among themselves.  Thus he
would soon learn an intelligible form of speech.

Tarzan rose to his feet upon the swaying branch where he had halted far
above the ground, and motioned to the child to follow him; but Tibo
only clung tightly to the bole of the tree and wept.  Being a boy, and
a native African, he had, of course, climbed into trees many times
before this; but the idea of racing off through the forest, leaping
from one branch to another, as his captor, to his horror, had done when
he had carried Tibo away from his mother, filled his childish heart
with terror.

Tarzan sighed.  His newly acquired balu had much indeed to learn.  It
was pitiful that a balu of his size and strength should be so backward.
He tried to coax Tibo to follow him; but the child dared not, so Tarzan
picked him up and carried him upon his back.  Tibo no longer scratched
or bit.  Escape seemed impossible.  Even now, were he set upon the
ground, the chance was remote, he knew, that he could find his way back
to the village of Mbonga, the chief.  Even if he could, there were the
lions and the leopards and the hyenas, any one of which, as Tibo was
well aware, was particularly fond of the meat of little black boys.

So far the terrible white god of the jungle had offered him no harm.
He could not expect even this much consideration from the frightful,
green-eyed man-eaters.  It would be the lesser of two evils, then, to
let the white god carry him away without scratching and biting, as he
had done at first.

As Tarzan swung rapidly through the trees, little Tibo closed his eyes
in terror rather than look longer down into the frightful abysses
beneath.  Never before in all his life had Tibo been so frightened, yet
as the white giant sped on with him through the forest there stole over
the child an inexplicable sensation of security as he saw how true were
the leaps of the ape-man, how unerring his grasp upon the swaying limbs
which gave him hand-hold, and then, too, there was safety in the middle
terraces of the forest, far above the reach of the dreaded lions.

And so Tarzan came to the clearing where the tribe fed, dropping among
them with his new balu clinging tightly to his shoulders.  He was
fairly in the midst of them before Tibo spied a single one of the great
hairy forms, or before the apes realized that Tarzan was not alone.
When they saw the little Gomangani perched upon his back some of them
came forward in curiosity with upcurled lips and snarling mien.

An hour before little Tibo would have said that he knew the uttermost
depths of fear; but now, as he saw these fearsome beasts surrounding
him, he realized that all that had gone before was as nothing by
comparison.  Why did the great white giant stand there so
unconcernedly?  Why did he not flee before these horrid, hairy, tree
men fell upon them both and tore them to pieces? And then there came to
Tibo a numbing recollection.  It was none other than the story he had
heard passed from mouth to mouth, fearfully, by the people of Mbonga,
the chief, that this great white demon of the jungle was naught other
than a hairless ape, for had not he been seen in company with these?

Tibo could only stare in wide-eyed horror at the approaching apes.  He
saw their beetling brows, their great fangs, their wicked eyes.  He
noted their mighty muscles rolling beneath their shaggy hides.  Their
every attitude and expression was a menace.  Tarzan saw this, too.  He
drew Tibo around in front of him.

"This is Tarzan's Go-bu-balu," he said.  "Do not harm him, or Tarzan
will kill you," and he bared his own fangs in the teeth of the nearest
ape.

"It is a Gomangani," replied the ape.  "Let me kill it.  It is a
Gomangani.  The Gomangani are our enemies.  Let me kill it."

"Go away," snarled Tarzan.  "I tell you, Gunto, it is Tarzan's balu.
Go away or Tarzan will kill you," and the ape-man took a step toward
the advancing ape.

The latter sidled off, quite stiff and haughty, after the manner of a
dog which meets another and is too proud to fight and too fearful to
turn his back and run.

Next came Teeka, prompted by curiosity.  At her side skipped little
Gazan.  They were filled with wonder like the others; but Teeka did not
bare her fangs.  Tarzan saw this and motioned that she approach.

"Tarzan has a balu now," he said.  "He and Teeka's balu can play
together."

"It is a Gomangani," replied Teeka.  "It will kill my balu.  Take it
away, Tarzan."

Tarzan laughed.  "It could not harm Pamba, the rat," he said.  "It is
but a little balu and very frightened.  Let Gazan play with it."

Teeka still was fearful, for with all their mighty ferocity the great
anthropoids are timid; but at last, assured by her great confidence in
Tarzan, she pushed Gazan forward toward the little black boy.  The
small ape, guided by instinct, drew back toward its mother, baring its
small fangs and screaming in mingled fear and rage.

Tibo, too, showed no signs of desiring a closer acquaintance with
Gazan, so Tarzan gave up his efforts for the time.

During the week which followed, Tarzan found his time much occupied.
His balu was a greater responsibility than he had counted upon.  Not
for a moment did he dare leave it, since of all the tribe, Teeka alone
could have been depended upon to refrain from slaying the hapless black
had it not been for Tarzan's constant watchfulness.  When the ape-man
hunted, he must carry Go-bu-balu about with him.  It was irksome, and
then the little black seemed so stupid and fearful to Tarzan.  It was
quite helpless against even the lesser of the jungle creatures.  Tarzan
wondered how it had survived at all.  He tried to teach it, and found a
ray of hope in the fact that Go-bu-balu had mastered a few words of the
language of the anthropoids, and that he could now cling to a
high-tossed branch without screaming in fear; but there was something
about the child which worried Tarzan.  He often had watched the blacks
within their village.  He had seen the children playing, and always
there had been much laughter; but little Go-bu-balu never laughed.  It
was true that Tarzan himself never laughed.  Upon occasion he smiled,
grimly, but to laughter he was a stranger.  The black, however, should
have laughed, reasoned the ape-man.  It was the way of the Gomangani.

Also, he saw that the little fellow often refused food and was growing
thinner day by day.  At times he surprised the boy sobbing softly to
himself.  Tarzan tried to comfort him, even as fierce Kala had
comforted Tarzan when the ape-man was a balu, but all to no avail.
Go-bu-balu merely no longer feared Tarzan--that was all.  He feared
every other living thing within the jungle.  He feared the jungle days
with their long excursions through the dizzy tree tops.  He feared the
jungle nights with their swaying, perilous couches far above the
ground, and the grunting and coughing of the great carnivora prowling
beneath him.

Tarzan did not know what to do.  His heritage of English blood rendered
it a difficult thing even to consider a surrender of his project,
though he was forced to admit to himself that his balu was not all that
he had hoped.  Though he was faithful to his self-imposed task, and
even found that he had grown to like Go-bu-balu, he could not deceive
himself into believing that he felt for it that fierce heat of
passionate affection which Teeka revealed for Gazan, and which the
black mother had shown for Go-bu-balu.

The little black boy from cringing terror at the sight of Tarzan passed
by degrees into trustfulness and admiration.  Only kindness had he ever
received at the hands of the great white devil-god, yet he had seen
with what ferocity his kindly captor could deal with others.  He had
seen him leap upon a certain he-ape which persisted in attempting to
seize and slay Go-bu-balu. He had seen the strong, white teeth of the
ape-man fastened in the neck of his adversary, and the mighty muscles
tensed in battle.  He had heard the savage, bestial snarls and roars of
combat, and he had realized with a shudder that he could not
differentiate between those of his guardian and those of the hairy ape.

He had seen Tarzan bring down a buck, just as Numa, the lion, might
have done, leaping upon its back and fastening his fangs in the
creature's neck.  Tibo had shuddered at the sight, but he had thrilled,
too, and for the first time there entered his dull, Negroid mind a
vague desire to emulate his savage foster parent.  But Tibo, the little
black boy, lacked the divine spark which had permitted Tarzan, the
white boy, to benefit by his training in the ways of the fierce jungle.
In imagination he was wanting, and imagination is but another name for
super-intelligence.

Imagination it is which builds bridges, and cities, and empires.  The
beasts know it not, the blacks only a little, while to one in a hundred
thousand of earth's dominant race it is given as a gift from heaven
that man may not perish from the earth.

While Tarzan pondered his problem concerning the future of his balu,
Fate was arranging to take the matter out of his hands.  Momaya, Tibo's
mother, grief-stricken at the loss of her boy, had consulted the tribal
witch-doctor, but to no avail.  The medicine he made was not good
medicine, for though Momaya paid him two goats for it, it did not bring
back Tibo, nor even indicate where she might search for him with
reasonable assurance of finding him.  Momaya, being of a short temper
and of another people, had little respect for the witch-doctor of her
husband's tribe, and so, when he suggested that a further payment of
two more fat goats would doubtless enable him to make stronger
medicine, she promptly loosed her shrewish tongue upon him, and with
such good effect that he was glad to take himself off with his zebra's
tail and his pot of magic.

When he had gone and Momaya had succeeded in partially subduing her
anger, she gave herself over to thought, as she so often had done since
the abduction of her Tibo, in the hope that she finally might discover
some feasible means of locating him, or at least assuring herself as to
whether he were alive or dead.

It was known to the blacks that Tarzan did not eat the flesh of man,
for he had slain more than one of their number, yet never tasted the
flesh of any.  Too, the bodies always had been found, sometimes
dropping as though from the clouds to alight in the center of the
village.  As Tibo's body had not been found, Momaya argued that he
still lived, but where?

Then it was that there came to her mind a recollection of Bukawai, the
unclean, who dwelt in a cave in the hillside to the north, and who it
was well known entertained devils in his evil lair.  Few, if any, had
the temerity to visit old Bukawai, firstly because of fear of his black
magic and the two hyenas who dwelt with him and were commonly known to
be devils masquerading, and secondly because of the loathsome disease
which had caused Bukawai to be an outcast--a disease which was slowly
eating away his face.

Now it was that Momaya reasoned shrewdly that if any might know the
whereabouts of her Tibo, it would be Bukawai, who was in friendly
intercourse with gods and demons, since a demon or a god it was who had
stolen her baby; but even her great mother love was sorely taxed to
find the courage to send her forth into the black jungle toward the
distant hills and the uncanny abode of Bukawai, the unclean, and his
devils.

Mother love, however, is one of the human passions which closely
approximates to the dignity of an irresistible force.  It drives the
frail flesh of weak women to deeds of heroic measure.  Momaya was
neither frail nor weak, physically, but she was a woman, an ignorant,
superstitious, African savage.  She believed in devils, in black magic,
and in witchcraft.  To Momaya, the jungle was inhabited by far more
terrifying things than lions and leopards--horrifying, nameless things
which possessed the power of wreaking frightful harm under various
innocent guises.

From one of the warriors of the village, whom she knew to have once
stumbled upon the lair of Bukawai, the mother of Tibo learned how she
might find it--near a spring of water which rose in a small rocky canon
between two hills, the easternmost of which was easily recognizable
because of a huge granite boulder which rested upon its summit.  The
westerly hill was lower than its companion, and was quite bare of
vegetation except for a single mimosa tree which grew just a little
below its summit.

These two hills, the man assured her, could be seen for some distance
before she reached them, and together formed an excellent guide to her
destination.  He warned her, however, to abandon so foolish and
dangerous an adventure, emphasizing what she already quite well knew,
that if she escaped harm at the hands of Bukawai and his demons, the
chances were that she would not be so fortunate with the great
carnivora of the jungle through which she must pass going and returning.

The warrior even went to Momaya's husband, who, in turn, having little
authority over the vixenish lady of his choice, went to Mbonga, the
chief.  The latter summoned Momaya, threatening her with the direst
punishment should she venture forth upon so unholy an excursion.  The
old chief's interest in the matter was due solely to that age-old
alliance which exists between church and state.  The local
witch-doctor, knowing his own medicine better than any other knew it,
was jealous of all other pretenders to accomplishments in the black
art.  He long had heard of the power of Bukawai, and feared lest,
should he succeed in recovering Momaya's lost child, much of the tribal
patronage and consequent fees would be diverted to the unclean one.  As
Mbonga received, as chief, a certain proportion of the witch-doctor's
fees and could expect nothing from Bukawai, his heart and soul were,
quite naturally, wrapped up in the orthodox church.

But if Momaya could view with intrepid heart an excursion into the
jungle and a visit to the fear-haunted abode of Bukawai, she was not
likely to be deterred by threats of future punishment at the hands of
old Mbonga, whom she secretly despised.  Yet she appeared to accede to
his injunctions, returning to her hut in silence.

She would have preferred starting upon her quest by day-light, but this
was now out of the question, since she must carry food and a weapon of
some sort--things which she never could pass out of the village with by
day without being subjected to curious questioning that surely would
come immediately to the ears of Mbonga.

So Momaya bided her time until night, and just before the gates of the
village were closed, she slipped through into the darkness and the
jungle.  She was much frightened, but she set her face resolutely
toward the north, and though she paused often to listen, breathlessly,
for the huge cats which, here, were her greatest terror, she
nevertheless continued her way staunchly for several hours, until a low
moan a little to her right and behind her brought her to a sudden stop.

With palpitating heart the woman stood, scarce daring to breathe, and
then, very faintly but unmistakable to her keen ears, came the stealthy
crunching of twigs and grasses beneath padded feet.

All about Momaya grew the giant trees of the tropical jungle, festooned
with hanging vines and mosses.  She seized upon the nearest and started
to clamber, apelike, to the branches above.  As she did so, there was a
sudden rush of a great body behind her, a menacing roar that caused the
earth to tremble, and something crashed into the very creepers to which
she was clinging--but below her.

Momaya drew herself to safety among the leafy branches and thanked the
foresight which had prompted her to bring along the dried human ear
which hung from a cord about her neck.  She always had known that that
ear was good medicine.  It had been given her, when a girl, by the
witch-doctor of her town tribe, and was nothing like the poor, weak
medicine of Mbonga's witch-doctor.

All night Momaya clung to her perch, for although the lion sought other
prey after a short time, she dared not descend into the darkness again,
for fear she might encounter him or another of his kind; but at
daylight she clambered down and resumed her way.

Tarzan of the Apes, finding that his balu never ceased to give evidence
of terror in the presence of the apes of the tribe, and also that most
of the adult apes were a constant menace to Go-bu-balu's life, so that
Tarzan dared not leave him alone with them, took to hunting with the
little black boy farther and farther from the stamping grounds of the
anthropoids.


Little by little his absences from the tribe grew in length as he
wandered farther away from them, until finally he found himself a
greater distance to the north than he ever before had hunted, and with
water and ample game and fruit, he felt not at all inclined to return
to the tribe.

Little Go-bu-balu gave evidences of a greater interest in life, an
interest which varied in direct proportion to the distance he was from
the apes of Kerchak.  He now trotted along behind Tarzan when the
ape-man went upon the ground, and in the trees he even did his best to
follow his mighty foster parent.  The boy was still sad and lonely.
His thin, little body had grown steadily thinner since he had come
among the apes, for while, as a young cannibal, he was not overnice in
the matter of diet, he found it not always to his taste to stomach the
weird things which tickled the palates of epicures among the apes.

His large eyes were very large indeed now, his cheeks sunken, and every
rib of his emaciated body plainly discernible to whomsoever should care
to count them.  Constant terror, perhaps, had had as much to do with
his physical condition as had improper food.  Tarzan noticed the change
and was worried.  He had hoped to see his balu wax sturdy and strong.
His disappointment was great.  In only one respect did Go-bu-balu seem
to progress--he readily was mastering the language of the apes.  Even
now he and Tarzan could converse in a fairly satisfactory manner by
supplementing the meager ape speech with signs; but for the most part,
Go-bu-balu was silent other than to answer questions put to him.  His
great sorrow was yet too new and too poignant to be laid aside even
momentarily.  Always he pined for Momaya--shrewish, hideous, repulsive,
perhaps, she would have been to you or me, but to Tibo she was mamma,
the personification of that one great love which knows no selfishness
and which does not consume itself in its own fires.

As the two hunted, or rather as Tarzan hunted and Go-bu-balu tagged
along in his wake, the ape-man noticed many things and thought much.
Once they came upon Sabor moaning in the tall grasses.  About her
romped and played two little balls of fur, but her eyes were for one
which lay between her great forepaws and did not romp, one who never
would romp again.

Tarzan read aright the anguish and the suffering of the huge mother
cat.  He had been minded to bait her.  It was to do this that he had
sneaked silently through the trees until he had come almost above her,
but something held the ape-man as he saw the lioness grieving over her
dead cub.  With the acquisition of Go-bu-balu, Tarzan had come to
realize the responsibilities and sorrows of parentage, without its
joys.  His heart went out to Sabor as it might not have done a few
weeks before.  As he watched her, there rose quite unbidden before him
a vision of Momaya, the skewer through the septum of her nose, her
pendulous under lip sagging beneath the weight which dragged it down.
Tarzan saw not her unloveliness; he saw only the same anguish that was
Sabor's, and he winced.  That strange functioning of the mind which
sometimes is called association of ideas snapped Teeka and Gazan before
the ape-man's mental vision.  What if one should come and take Gazan
from Teeka.  Tarzan uttered a low and ominous growl as though Gazan
were his own.  Go-bu-balu glanced here and there apprehensively,
thinking that Tarzan had espied an enemy.  Sabor sprang suddenly to her
feet, her yellow-green eyes blazing, her tail lashing as she cocked her
ears, and raising her muzzle, sniffed the air for possible danger.  The
two little cubs, which had been playing, scampered quickly to her, and
standing beneath her, peered out from between her forelegs, their big
ears upstanding, their little heads cocked first upon one side and then
upon the other.

With a shake of his black shock, Tarzan turned away and resumed his
hunting in another direction; but all day there rose one after another,
above the threshold of his objective mind, memory portraits of Sabor,
of Momaya, and of Teeka--a lioness, a cannibal, and a she-ape, yet to
the ape-man they were identical through motherhood.

It was noon of the third day when Momaya came within sight of the cave
of Bukawai, the unclean.  The old witch-doctor had rigged a framework
of interlaced boughs to close the mouth of the cave from predatory
beasts.  This was now set to one side, and the black cavern beyond
yawned mysterious and repellent.  Momaya shivered as from a cold wind
of the rainy season.  No sign of life appeared about the cave, yet
Momaya experienced that uncanny sensation as of unseen eyes regarding
her malevolently.  Again she shuddered.  She tried to force her
unwilling feet onward toward the cave, when from its depths issued an
uncanny sound that was neither brute nor human, a weird sound that was
akin to mirthless laughter.

With a stifled scream, Momaya turned and fled into the jungle.  For a
hundred yards she ran before she could control her terror, and then she
paused, listening.  Was all her labor, were all the terrors and dangers
through which she had passed to go for naught? She tried to steel
herself to return to the cave, but again fright overcame her.

Saddened, disheartened, she turned slowly upon the back trail toward
the village of Mbonga.  Her young shoulders now were drooped like those
of an old woman who bears a great burden of many years with their
accumulated pains and sorrows, and she walked with tired feet and a
halting step.  The spring of youth was gone from Momaya.

For another hundred yards she dragged her weary way, her brain half
paralyzed from dumb terror and suffering, and then there came to her
the memory of a little babe that suckled at her breast, and of a slim
boy who romped, laughing, about her, and they were both Tibo--her Tibo!

Her shoulders straightened.  She shook her savage head, and she turned
about and walked boldly back to the mouth of the cave of Bukawai, the
unclean--of Bukawai, the witch-doctor.

Again, from the interior of the cave came the hideous laughter that was
not laughter.  This time Momaya recognized it for what it was, the
strange cry of a hyena.  No more did she shudder, but she held her
spear ready and called aloud to Bukawai to come out.

Instead of Bukawai came the repulsive head of a hyena.  Momaya poked at
it with her spear, and the ugly, sullen brute drew back with an angry
growl.  Again Momaya called Bukawai by name, and this time there came
an answer in mumbling tones that were scarce more human than those of
the beast.

"Who comes to Bukawai?" queried the voice.

"It is Momaya," replied the woman; "Momaya from the village of Mbonga,
the chief.

"What do you want?"

"I want good medicine, better medicine than Mbonga's witch-doctor can
make," replied Momaya.  "The great, white, jungle god has stolen my
Tibo, and I want medicine to bring him back, or to find where he is
hidden that I may go and get him."

"Who is Tibo?" asked Bukawai.

Momaya told him.

"Bukawai's medicine is very strong," said the voice.  "Five goats and a
new sleeping mat are scarce enough in exchange for Bukawai's medicine."

"Two goats are enough," said Momaya, for the spirit of barter is strong
in the breasts of the blacks.

The pleasure of haggling over the price was a sufficiently potent lure
to draw Bukawai to the mouth of the cave.  Momaya was sorry when she
saw him that he had not remained within.  There are some things too
horrible, too hideous, too repulsive for description--Bukawai's face
was of these.  When Momaya saw him she understood why it was that he
was almost inarticulate.

Beside him were two hyenas, which rumor had said were his only and
constant companions.  They made an excellent trio--the most repulsive
of beasts with the most repulsive of humans.

"Five goats and a new sleeping mat," mumbled Bukawai.

"Two fat goats and a sleeping mat." Momaya raised her bid; but Bukawai
was obdurate.  He stuck for the five goats and the sleeping mat for a
matter of half an hour, while the hyenas sniffed and growled and
laughed hideously.  Momaya was determined to give all that Bukawai
asked if she could do no better, but haggling is second nature to black
barterers, and in the end it partly repaid her, for a compromise
finally was reached which included three fat goats, a new sleeping mat,
and a piece of copper wire.

"Come back tonight," said Bukawai, "when the moon is two hours in the
sky.  Then will I make the strong medicine which shall bring Tibo back
to you.  Bring with you the three fat goats, the new sleeping mat, and
the piece of copper wire the length of a large man's forearm."

"I cannot bring them," said Momaya.  "You will have to come after them.
When you have restored Tibo to me, you shall have them all at the
village of Mbonga."

Bukawai shook his head.

"I will make no medicine," he said, "until I have the goats and the mat
and the copper wire."

Momaya pleaded and threatened, but all to no avail.  Finally, she
turned away and started off through the jungle toward the village of
Mbonga.  How she could get three goats and a sleeping mat out of the
village and through the jungle to the cave of Bukawai, she did not
know, but that she would do it somehow she was quite positive--she
would do it or die.  Tibo must be restored to her.

Tarzan coming lazily through the jungle with little Go-bu-balu, caught
the scent of Bara, the deer.  Tarzan hungered for the flesh of Bara.
Naught tickled his palate so greatly; but to stalk Bara with Go-bu-balu
at his heels, was out of the question, so he hid the child in the
crotch of a tree where the thick foliage screened him from view, and
set off swiftly and silently upon the spoor of Bara.

Tibo alone was more terrified than Tibo even among the apes.  Real and
apparent dangers are less disconcerting than those which we imagine,
and only the gods of his people knew how much Tibo imagined.

He had been but a short time in his hiding place when he heard
something approaching through the jungle.  He crouched closer to the
limb upon which he lay and prayed that Tarzan would return quickly.
His wide eyes searched the jungle in the direction of the moving
creature.

What if it was a leopard that had caught his scent! It would be upon
him in a minute.  Hot tears flowed from the large eyes of little Tibo.
The curtain of jungle foliage rustled close at hand.  The thing was but
a few paces from his tree!  His eyes fairly popped from his black face
as he watched for the appearance of the dread creature which presently
would thrust a snarling countenance from between the vines and creepers.

And then the curtain parted and a woman stepped into full view.  With a
gasping cry, Tibo tumbled from his perch and raced toward her.  Momaya
suddenly started back and raised her spear, but a second later she cast
it aside and caught the thin body in her strong arms.

Crushing it to her, she cried and laughed all at one and the same time,
and hot tears of joy, mingled with the tears of Tibo, trickled down the
crease between her naked breasts.

Disturbed by the noise so close at hand, there arose from his sleep in
a near-by thicket Numa, the lion.  He looked through the tangled
underbrush and saw the black woman and her young.  He licked his chops
and measured the distance between them and himself.  A short charge and
a long leap would carry him upon them.  He flicked the end of his tail
and sighed.

A vagrant breeze, swirling suddenly in the wrong direction, carried the
scent of Tarzan to the sensitive nostrils of Bara, the deer.  There was
a startled tensing of muscles and cocking of ears, a sudden dash, and
Tarzan's meat was gone.  The ape-man angrily shook his head and turned
back toward the spot where he had left Go-bu-balu. He came softly, as
was his way.  Before he reached the spot he heard strange sounds--the
sound of a woman laughing and of a woman weeping, and the two which
seemed to come from one throat were mingled with the convulsive sobbing
of a child.  Tarzan hastened, and when Tarzan hastened, only the birds
and the wind went faster.

And as Tarzan approached the sounds, he heard another, a deep sigh.
Momaya did not hear it, nor did Tibo; but the ears of Tarzan were as
the ears of Bara, the deer.  He heard the sigh, and he knew, so he
unloosed the heavy spear which dangled at his back.  Even as he sped
through the branches of the trees, with the same ease that you or I
might take out a pocket handkerchief as we strolled nonchalantly down a
lazy country lane, Tarzan of the Apes took the spear from its thong
that it might be ready against any emergency.

Numa, the lion, did not rush madly to attack.  He reasoned again, and
reason told him that already the prey was his, so he pushed his great
bulk through the foliage and stood eyeing his meat with baleful,
glaring eyes.

Momaya saw him and shrieked, drawing Tibo closer to her breast.  To
have found her child and to lose him, all in a moment!  She raised her
spear, throwing her hand far back of her shoulder.  Numa roared and
stepped slowly forward.  Momaya cast her weapon.  It grazed the tawny
shoulder, inflicting a flesh wound which aroused all the terrific
bestiality of the carnivore, and the lion charged.

Momaya tried to close her eyes, but could not.  She saw the flashing
swiftness of the huge, oncoming death, and then she saw something else.
She saw a mighty, naked white man drop as from the heavens into the
path of the charging lion.  She saw the muscles of a great arm flash in
the light of the equatorial sun as it filtered, dappling, through the
foliage above.  She saw a heavy hunting spear hurtle through the air to
meet the lion in midleap.

Numa brought up upon his haunches, roaring terribly and striking at the
spear which protruded from his breast.  His great blows bent and
twisted the weapon.  Tarzan, crouching and with hunting knife in hand,
circled warily about the frenzied cat.  Momaya, wide-eyed, stood rooted
to the spot, watching, fascinated.

In sudden fury Numa hurled himself toward the ape-man, but the wiry
creature eluded the blundering charge, side-stepping quickly only to
rush in upon his foe.  Twice the hunting blade flashed in the air.
Twice it fell upon the back of Numa, already weakening from the spear
point so near his heart.  The second stroke of the blade pierced far
into the beast's spine, and with a last convulsive sweep of the
fore-paws, in a vain attempt to reach his tormentor, Numa sprawled upon
the ground, paralyzed and dying.

Bukawai, fearful lest he should lose any recompense, followed Momaya
with the intention of persuading her to part with her ornaments of
copper and iron against her return with the price of the medicine--to
pay, as it were, for an option on his services as one pays a retaining
fee to an attorney, for, like an attorney, Bukawai knew the value of
his medicine and that it was well to collect as much as possible in
advance.

The witch-doctor came upon the scene as Tarzan leaped to meet the
lion's charge.  He saw it all and marveled, guessing immediately that
this must be the strange white demon concerning whom he had heard vague
rumors before Momaya came to him.

Momaya, now that the lion was past harming her or hers, gazed with new
terror upon Tarzan.  It was he who had stolen her Tibo.  Doubtless he
would attempt to steal him again.  Momaya hugged the boy close to her.
She was determined to die this time rather than suffer Tibo to be taken
from her again.

Tarzan eyed them in silence.  The sight of the boy clinging, sobbing,
to his mother aroused within his savage breast a melancholy loneliness.
There was none thus to cling to Tarzan, who yearned so for the love of
someone, of something.

At last Tibo looked up, because of the quiet that had fallen upon the
jungle, and saw Tarzan.  He did not shrink.

"Tarzan," he said, in the speech of the great apes of the tribe of
Kerchak, "do not take me from Momaya, my mother.  Do not take me again
to the lair of the hairy, tree men, for I fear Taug and Gunto and the
others.  Let me stay with Momaya, O Tarzan, God of the Jungle! Let me
stay with Momaya, my mother, and to the end of our days we will bless
you and put food before the gates of the village of Mbonga that you may
never hunger."

Tarzan sighed.

"Go," he said, "back to the village of Mbonga, and Tarzan will follow
to see that no harm befalls you."

Tibo translated the words to his mother, and the two turned their backs
upon the ape-man and started off toward home.  In the heart of Momaya
was a great fear and a great exultation, for never before had she
walked with God, and never had she been so happy.  She strained little
Tibo to her, stroking his thin cheek.  Tarzan saw and sighed again.

"For Teeka there is Teeka's balu," he soliloquized; "for Sabor there
are balus, and for the she-Gomangani, and for Bara, and for Manu, and
even for Pamba, the rat; but for Tarzan there can be none--neither a
she nor a balu.  Tarzan of the Apes is a man, and it must be that man
walks alone."

Bukawai saw them go, and he mumbled through his rotting face, swearing
a great oath that he would yet have the three fat goats, the new
sleeping mat, and the bit of copper wire.




                           6

           The Witch-Doctor Seeks Vengeance

LORD GREYSTOKE was hunting, or, to be more accurate, he was shooting
pheasants at Chamston-Hedding. Lord Greystoke was immaculately and
appropriately garbed--to the minutest detail he was vogue.  To be sure,
he was among the forward guns, not being considered a sporting shot,
but what he lacked in skill he more than made up in appearance.  At the
end of the day he would, doubtless, have many birds to his credit,
since he had two guns and a smart loader--many more birds than he could
eat in a year, even had he been hungry, which he was not, having but
just arisen from the breakfast table.

The beaters--there were twenty-three of them, in white smocks--had but
just driven the birds into a patch of gorse, and were now circling to
the opposite side that they might drive down toward the guns.  Lord
Greystoke was quite as excited as he ever permitted himself to become.
There was an exhilaration in the sport that would not be denied.  He
felt his blood tingling through his veins as the beaters approached
closer and closer to the birds.  In a vague and stupid sort of way Lord
Greystoke felt, as he always felt upon such occasions, that he was
experiencing a sensation somewhat akin to a reversion to a prehistoric
type--that the blood of an ancient forbear was coursing hot through
him, a hairy, half-naked forbear who had lived by the hunt.

And far away in a matted equatorial jungle another Lord Greystoke, the
real Lord Greystoke, hunted.  By the standards which he knew, he, too,
was vogue--utterly vogue, as was the primal ancestor before the first
eviction.  The day being sultry, the leopard skin had been left behind.
The real Lord Greystoke had not two guns, to be sure, nor even one,
neither did he have a smart loader; but he possessed something
infinitely more efficacious than guns, or loaders, or even twenty-three
beaters in white smocks--he possessed an appetite, an uncanny
woodcraft, and muscles that were as steel springs.

Later that day, in England, a Lord Greystoke ate bountifully of things
he had not killed, and he drank other things which were uncorked to the
accompaniment of much noise.  He patted his lips with snowy linen to
remove the faint traces of his repast, quite ignorant of the fact that
he was an impostor and that the rightful owner of his noble title was
even then finishing his own dinner in far-off Africa.  He was not using
snowy linen, though.  Instead he drew the back of a brown forearm and
hand across his mouth and wiped his bloody fingers upon his thighs.
Then he moved slowly through the jungle to the drinking place, where,
upon all fours, he drank as drank his fellows, the other beasts of the
jungle.

As he quenched his thirst, another denizen of the gloomy forest
approached the stream along the path behind him.  It was Numa, the
lion, tawny of body and black of mane, scowling and sinister, rumbling
out low, coughing roars.  Tarzan of the Apes heard him long before he
came within sight, but the ape-man went on with his drinking until he
had had his fill; then he arose, slowly, with the easy grace of a
creature of the wilds and all the quiet dignity that was his birthright.

Numa halted as he saw the man standing at the very spot where the king
would drink.  His jaws were parted, and his cruel eyes gleamed.  He
growled and advanced slowly.  The man growled, too, backing slowly to
one side, and watching, not the lion's face, but its tail.  Should that
commence to move from side to side in quick, nervous jerks, it would be
well to be upon the alert, and should it rise suddenly erect, straight
and stiff, then one might prepare to fight or flee; but it did neither,
so Tarzan merely backed away and the lion came down and drank scarce
fifty feet from where the man stood.

Tomorrow they might be at one another's throats, but today there
existed one of those strange and inexplicable truces which so often are
seen among the savage ones of the jungle.  Before Numa had finished
drinking, Tarzan had returned into the forest, and was swinging away in
the direction of the village of Mbonga, the black chief.

It had been at least a moon since the ape-man had called upon the
Gomangani.  Not since he had restored little Tibo to his grief-stricken
mother had the whim seized him to do so.  The incident of the adopted
balu was a closed one to Tarzan.  He had sought to find something upon
which to lavish such an affection as Teeka lavished upon her balu, but
a short experience of the little black boy had made it quite plain to
the ape-man that no such sentiment could exist between them.

The fact that he had for a time treated the little black as he might
have treated a real balu of his own had in no way altered the vengeful
sentiments with which he considered the murderers of Kala.  The
Gomangani were his deadly enemies, nor could they ever be aught else.
Today he looked forward to some slight relief from the monotony of his
existence in such excitement as he might derive from baiting the blacks.

It was not yet dark when he reached the village and took his place in
the great tree overhanging the palisade.  From beneath came a great
wailing out of the depths of a near-by hut.  The noise fell
disagreeably upon Tarzan's ears--it jarred and grated.  He did not like
it, so he decided to go away for a while in the hopes that it might
cease; but though he was gone for a couple of hours the wailing still
continued when he returned.

With the intention of putting a violent termination to the annoying
sound, Tarzan slipped silently from the tree into the shadows beneath.
Creeping stealthily and keeping well in the cover of other huts, he
approached that from which rose the sounds of lamentation.  A fire
burned brightly before the doorway as it did before other doorways in
the village.  A few females squatted about, occasionally adding their
own mournful howlings to those of the master artist within.

The ape-man smiled a slow smile as he thought of the consternation
which would follow the quick leap that would carry him among the
females and into the full light of the fire.  Then he would dart into
the hut during the excitement, throttle the chief screamer, and be gone
into the jungle before the blacks could gather their scattered nerves
for an assault.

Many times had Tarzan behaved similarly in the village of Mbonga, the
chief.  His mysterious and unexpected appearances always filled the
breasts of the poor, superstitious blacks with the panic of terror;
never, it seemed, could they accustom themselves to the sight of him.
It was this terror which lent to the adventures the spice of interest
and amusement which the human mind of the ape-man craved.  Merely to
kill was not in itself sufficient.  Accustomed to the sight of death,
Tarzan found no great pleasure in it.  Long since had he avenged the
death of Kala, but in the accomplishment of it, he had learned the
excitement and the pleasure to be derived from the baiting of the
blacks.  Of this he never tired.

It was just as he was about to spring forward with a savage roar that a
figure appeared in the doorway of the hut.  It was the figure of the
wailer whom he had come to still, the figure of a young woman with a
wooden skewer through the split septum of her nose, with a heavy metal
ornament depending from her lower lip, which it had dragged down to
hideous and repulsive deformity, with strange tattooing upon forehead,
cheeks, and breasts, and a wonderful coiffure built up with mud and
wire.

A sudden flare of the fire threw the grotesque figure into high relief,
and Tarzan recognized her as Momaya, the mother of Tibo.  The fire also
threw out a fitful flame which carried to the shadows where Tarzan
lurked, picking out his light brown body from the surrounding darkness.
Momaya saw him and knew him.  With a cry, she leaped forward and Tarzan
came to meet her.  The other women, turning, saw him, too; but they did
not come toward him.  Instead they rose as one, shrieked as one, fled
as one.

Momaya threw herself at Tarzan's feet, raising supplicating hands
toward him and pouring forth from her mutilated lips a perfect cataract
of words, not one of which the ape-man comprehended.  For a moment he
looked down upon the upturned, frightful face of the woman.  He had
come to slay, but that overwhelming torrent of speech filled him with
consternation and with awe.  He glanced about him apprehensively, then
back at the woman.  A revulsion of feeling seized him.  He could not
kill little Tibo's mother, nor could he stand and face this verbal
geyser.  With a quick gesture of impatience at the spoiling of his
evening's entertainment, he wheeled and leaped away into the darkness.
A moment later he was swinging through the black jungle night, the
cries and lamentations of Momaya growing fainter in the distance.

It was with a sigh of relief that he finally reached a point from which
he could no longer hear them, and finding a comfortable crotch high
among the trees, composed himself for a night of dreamless slumber,
while a prowling lion moaned and coughed beneath him, and in far-off
England the other Lord Greystoke, with the assistance of a valet,
disrobed and crawled between spotless sheets, swearing irritably as a
cat meowed beneath his window.

As Tarzan followed the fresh spoor of Horta, the boar, the following
morning, he came upon the tracks of two Gomangani, a large one and a
small one.  The ape-man, accustomed as he was to questioning closely
all that fell to his perceptions, paused to read the story written in
the soft mud of the game trail.  You or I would have seen little of
interest there, even if, by chance, we could have seen aught.  Perhaps
had one been there to point them out to us, we might have noted
indentations in the mud, but there were countless indentations, one
overlapping another into a confusion that would have been entirely
meaningless to us.  To Tarzan each told its own story.  Tantor, the
elephant, had passed that way as recently as three suns since.  Numa
had hunted here the night just gone, and Horta, the boar, had walked
slowly along the trail within an hour; but what held Tarzan's attention
was the spoor tale of the Gomangani.  It told him that the day before
an old man had gone toward the north in company with a little boy, and
that with them had been two hyenas.

Tarzan scratched his head in puzzled incredulity.  He could see by the
overlapping of the footprints that the beasts had not been following
the two, for sometimes one was ahead of them and one behind, and again
both were in advance, or both were in the rear.  It was very strange
and quite inexplicable, especially where the spoor showed where the
hyenas in the wider portions of the path had walked one on either side
of the human pair, quite close to them.  Then Tarzan read in the spoor
of the smaller Gomangani a shrinking terror of the beast that brushed
his side, but in that of the old man was no sign of fear.

At first Tarzan had been solely occupied by the remarkable
juxtaposition of the spoor of Dango and Gomangani, but now his keen
eyes caught something in the spoor of the little Gomangani which
brought him to a sudden stop.  It was as though, finding a letter in
the road, you suddenly had discovered in it the familiar handwriting of
a friend.

"Go-bu-balu!" exclaimed the ape-man, and at once memory flashed upon
the screen of recollection the supplicating attitude of Momaya as she
had hurled herself before him in the village of Mbonga the night
before.  Instantly all was explained--the wailing and lamentation, the
pleading of the black mother, the sympathetic howling of the shes about
the fire.  Little Go-bu-balu had been stolen again, and this time by
another than Tarzan.  Doubtless the mother had thought that he was
again in the power of Tarzan of the Apes, and she had been beseeching
him to return her balu to her.

Yes, it was all quite plain now; but who could have stolen Go-bu-balu
this time? Tarzan wondered, and he wondered, too, about the presence of
Dango.  He would investigate.  The spoor was a day old and it ran
toward the north.  Tarzan set out to follow it.  In places it was
totally obliterated by the passage of many beasts, and where the way
was rocky, even Tarzan of the Apes was almost baffled; but there was
still the faint effluvium which clung to the human spoor, appreciable
only to such highly trained perceptive powers as were Tarzan's.


It had all happened to little Tibo very suddenly and unexpectedly
within the brief span of two suns.  First had come Bukawai, the
witch-doctor--Bukawai, the unclean--with the ragged bit of flesh which
still clung to his rotting face.  He had come alone and by day to the
place at the river where Momaya went daily to wash her body and that of
Tibo, her little boy.  He had stepped out from behind a great bush
quite close to Momaya, frightening little Tibo so that he ran screaming
to his mother's protecting arms.

But Momaya, though startled, had wheeled to face the fearsome thing
with all the savage ferocity of a she-tiger at bay.  When she saw who
it was, she breathed a sigh of partial relief, though she still clung
tightly to Tibo.

"I have come," said Bukawai without preliminary, "for the three fat
goats, the new sleeping mat, and the bit of copper wire as long as a
tall man's arm."

"I have no goats for you," snapped Momaya, "nor a sleeping mat, nor any
wire.  Your medicine was never made.  The white jungle god gave me back
my Tibo.  You had nothing to do with it."

"But I did," mumbled Bukawai through his fleshless jaws.  "It was I who
commanded the white jungle god to give back your Tibo."

Momaya laughed in his face.  "Speaker of lies," she cried, "go back to
your foul den and your hyenas.  Go back and hide your stinking face in
the belly of the mountain, lest the sun, seeing it, cover his face with
a black cloud."

"I have come," reiterated Bukawai, "for the three fat goats, the new
sleeping mat, and the bit of copper wire the length of a tall man's
arm, which you were to pay me for the return of your Tibo."

"It was to be the length of a man's forearm," corrected Momaya, "but
you shall have nothing, old thief.  You would not make medicine until I
had brought the payment in advance, and when I was returning to my
village the great, white jungle god gave me back my Tibo--gave him to
me out of the jaws of Numa.  His medicine is true medicine--yours is
the weak medicine of an old man with a hole in his face."

"I have come," repeated Bukawai patiently, "for the three fat--" But
Momaya had not waited to hear more of what she already knew by heart.
Clasping Tibo close to her side, she was hurrying away toward the
palisaded village of Mbonga, the chief.

And the next day, when Momaya was working in the plantain field with
others of the women of the tribe, and little Tibo had been playing at
the edge of the jungle, casting a small spear in anticipation of the
distant day when he should be a full-fledged warrior, Bukawai had come
again.

Tibo had seen a squirrel scampering up the bole of a great tree.  His
childish mind had transformed it into the menacing figure of a hostile
warrior.  Little Tibo had raised his tiny spear, his heart filled with
the savage blood lust of his race, as he pictured the night's orgy when
he should dance about the corpse of his human kill as the women of his
tribe prepared the meat for the feast to follow.

But when he cast the spear, he missed both squirrel and tree, losing
his missile far among the tangled undergrowth of the jungle.  However,
it could be but a few steps within the forbidden labyrinth.  The women
were all about in the field.  There were warriors on guard within easy
hail, and so little Tibo boldly ventured into the dark place.

Just behind the screen of creepers and matted foliage lurked three
horrid figures--an old, old man, black as the pit, with a face half
eaten away by leprosy, his sharp-filed teeth, the teeth of a cannibal,
showing yellow and repulsive through the great gaping hole where his
mouth and nose had been.  And beside him, equally hideous, stood two
powerful hyenas--carrion-eaters consorting with carrion.

Tibo did not see them until, head down, he had forced his way through
the thickly growing vines in search of his little spear, and then it
was too late.  As he looked up into the face of Bukawai, the old
witch-doctor seized him, muffling his screams with a palm across his
mouth.  Tibo struggled futilely.

A moment later he was being hustled away through the dark and terrible
jungle, the frightful old man still muffling his screams, and the two
hideous hyenas pacing now on either side, now before, now behind,
always prowling, always growling, snapping, snarling, or, worst of all,
laughing hideously.

To little Tibo, who within his brief existence had passed through such
experiences as are given to few to pass through in a lifetime, the
northward journey was a nightmare of terror.  He thought now of the
time that he had been with the great, white jungle god, and he prayed
with all his little soul that he might be back again with the
white-skinned giant who consorted with the hairy tree men.
Terror-stricken he had been then, but his surroundings had been nothing
by comparison with those which he now endured.

The old man seldom addressed Tibo, though he kept up an almost
continuous mumbling throughout the long day.  Tibo caught repeated
references to fat goats, sleeping mats, and pieces of copper wire.
"Ten fat goats, ten fat goats," the old Negro would croon over and over
again.  By this little Tibo guessed that the price of his ransom had
risen.  Ten fat goats? Where would his mother get ten fat goats, or
thin ones, either, for that matter, to buy back just a poor little boy?
Mbonga would never let her have them, and Tibo knew that his father
never had owned more than three goats at the same time in all his life.
Ten fat goats! Tibo sniffled.  The putrid old man would kill him and
eat him, for the goats would never be forthcoming.  Bukawai would throw
his bones to the hyenas.  The little black boy shuddered and became so
weak that he almost fell in his tracks.  Bukawai cuffed him on an ear
and jerked him along.

After what seemed an eternity to Tibo, they arrived at the mouth of a
cave between two rocky hills.  The opening was low and narrow.  A few
saplings bound together with strips of rawhide closed it against stray
beasts.  Bukawai removed the primitive door and pushed Tibo within.
The hyenas, snarling, rushed past him and were lost to view in the
blackness of the interior.  Bukawai replaced the saplings and seizing
Tibo roughly by the arm, dragged him along a narrow, rocky passage.
The floor was comparatively smooth, for the dirt which lay thick upon
it had been trodden and tramped by many feet until few inequalities
remained.

The passage was tortuous, and as it was very dark and the walls rough
and rocky, Tibo was scratched and bruised from the many bumps he
received.  Bukawai walked as rapidly through the winding gallery as one
would traverse a familiar lane by daylight.  He knew every twist and
turn as a mother knows the face of her child, and he seemed to be in a
hurry.  He jerked poor little Tibo possibly a trifle more ruthlessly
than necessary even at the pace Bukawai set; but the old witch-doctor,
an outcast from the society of man, diseased, shunned, hated, feared,
was far from possessing an angelic temper.  Nature had given him few of
the kindlier characteristics of man, and these few Fate had eradicated
entirely.  Shrewd, cunning, cruel, vindictive, was Bukawai, the
witch-doctor.

Frightful tales were whispered of the cruel tortures he inflicted upon
his victims.  Children were frightened into obedience by the threat of
his name.  Often had Tibo been thus frightened, and now he was reaping
a grisly harvest of terror from the seeds his mother had innocently
sown.  The darkness, the presence of the dreaded witch-doctor, the pain
of the contusions, with a haunting premonition of the future, and the
fear of the hyenas combined to almost paralyze the child.  He stumbled
and reeled until Bukawai was dragging rather than leading him.

Presently Tibo saw a faint lightness ahead of them, and a moment later
they emerged into a roughly circular chamber to which a little daylight
filtered through a rift in the rocky ceiling.  The hyenas were there
ahead of them, waiting.  As Bukawai entered with Tibo, the beasts slunk
toward them, baring yellow fangs.  They were hungry.  Toward Tibo they
came, and one snapped at his naked legs.  Bukawai seized a stick from
the floor of the chamber and struck a vicious blow at the beast, at the
same time mumbling forth a volley of execrations.  The hyena dodged and
ran to the side of the chamber, where he stood growling.  Bukawai took
a step toward the creature, which bristled with rage at his approach.
Fear and hatred shot from its evil eyes, but, fortunately for Bukawai,
fear predominated.

Seeing that he was unnoticed, the second beast made a short, quick rush
for Tibo.  The child screamed and darted after the witch-doctor, who
now turned his attention to the second hyena.  This one he reached with
his heavy stick, striking it repeatedly and driving it to the wall.
There the two carrion-eaters commenced to circle the chamber while the
human carrion, their master, now in a perfect frenzy of demoniacal
rage, ran to and fro in an effort to intercept them, striking out with
his cudgel and lashing them with his tongue, calling down upon them the
curses of whatever gods and demons he could summon to memory, and
describing in lurid figures the ignominy of their ancestors.

Several times one or the other of the beasts would turn to make a stand
against the witch-doctor, and then Tibo would hold his breath in
agonized terror, for never in his brief life had he seen such frightful
hatred depicted upon the countenance of man or beast; but always fear
overcame the rage of the savage creatures, so that they resumed their
flight, snarling and bare-fanged, just at the moment that Tibo was
certain they would spring at Bukawai's throat.

At last the witch-doctor tired of the futile chase.  With a snarl quite
as bestial as those of the beast, he turned toward Tibo.  "I go to
collect the ten fat goats, the new sleeping mat, and the two pieces of
copper wire that your mother will pay for the medicine I shall make to
bring you back to her," he said.  "You will stay here.  There," and he
pointed toward the passage which they had followed to the chamber, "I
will leave the hyenas.  If you try to escape, they will eat you."

He cast aside the stick and called to the beasts.  They came, snarling
and slinking, their tails between their legs.  Bukawai led them to the
passage and drove them into it.  Then he dragged a rude lattice into
place before the opening after he, himself, had left the chamber.
"This will keep them from you," he said.  "If I do not get the ten fat
goats and the other things, they shall at least have a few bones after
I am through." And he left the boy to think over the meaning of his
all-too-suggestive words.

When he was gone, Tibo threw himself upon the earth floor and broke
into childish sobs of terror and loneliness.  He knew that his mother
had no ten fat goats to give and that when Bukawai returned, little
Tibo would be killed and eaten.  How long he lay there he did not know,
but presently he was aroused by the growling of the hyenas.  They had
returned through the passage and were glaring at him from beyond the
lattice.  He could see their yellow eyes blazing through the darkness.
They reared up and clawed at the barrier.  Tibo shivered and withdrew
to the opposite side of the chamber.  He saw the lattice sag and sway
to the attacks of the beasts.  Momentarily he expected that it would
fall inward, letting the creatures upon him.

Wearily the horror-ridden hours dragged their slow way.  Night came,
and for a time Tibo slept, but it seemed that the hungry beasts never
slept.  Always they stood just beyond the lattice growling their
hideous growls or laughing their hideous laughs.  Through the narrow
rift in the rocky roof above him, Tibo could see a few stars, and once
the moon crossed.  At last daylight came again.  Tibo was very hungry
and thirsty, for he had not eaten since the morning before, and only
once upon the long march had he been permitted to drink, but even
hunger and thirst were almost forgotten in the terror of his position.

It was after daylight that the child discovered a second opening in the
walls of the subterranean chamber, almost opposite that at which the
hyenas still stood glaring hungrily at him.  It was only a narrow slit
in the rocky wall.  It might lead in but a few feet, or it might lead
to freedom! Tibo approached it and looked within.  He could see
nothing.  He extended his arm into the blackness, but he dared not
venture farther.  Bukawai never would have left open a way of escape,
Tibo reasoned, so this passage must lead either nowhere or to some
still more hideous danger.

To the boy's fear of the actual dangers which menaced him--Bukawai and
the two hyenas--his superstition added countless others quite too
horrible even to name, for in the lives of the blacks, through the
shadows of the jungle day and the black horrors of the jungle night,
flit strange, fantastic shapes peopling the already hideously peopled
forests with menacing figures, as though the lion and the leopard, the
snake and the hyena, and the countless poisonous insects were not quite
sufficient to strike terror to the hearts of the poor, simple creatures
whose lot is cast in earth's most fearsome spot.


And so it was that little Tibo cringed not only from real menaces but
from imaginary ones.  He was afraid even to venture upon a road that
might lead to escape, lest Bukawai had set to watch it some frightful
demon of the jungle.

But the real menaces suddenly drove the imaginary ones from the boy's
mind, for with the coming of daylight the half-famished hyenas renewed
their efforts to break down the frail barrier which kept them from
their prey.  Rearing upon their hind feet they clawed and struck at the
lattice.  With wide eyes Tibo saw it sag and rock.  Not for long, he
knew, could it withstand the assaults of these two powerful and
determined brutes.  Already one corner had been forced past the rocky
protuberance of the entrance way which had held it in place.  A shaggy
forearm protruded into the chamber.  Tibo trembled as with ague, for he
knew that the end was near.

Backing against the farther wall he stood flattened out as far from the
beasts as he could get.  He saw the lattice give still more.  He saw a
savage, snarling head forced past it, and grinning jaws snapping and
gaping toward him.  In another instant the pitiful fabric would fall
inward, and the two would be upon him, rending his flesh from his
bones, gnawing the bones themselves, fighting for possession of his
entrails.

* * *

Bukawai came upon Momaya outside the palisade of Mbonga, the chief.  At
sight of him the woman drew back in revulsion, then she flew at him,
tooth and nail; but Bukawai threatening her with a spear held her at a
safe distance.

"Where is my baby?" she cried.  "Where is my little Tibo?"

Bukawai opened his eyes in well-simulated amazement.  "Your baby!" he
exclaimed.  "What should I know of him, other than that I rescued him
from the white god of the jungle and have not yet received my pay.  I
come for the goats and the sleeping mat and the piece of copper wire
the length of a tall man's arm from the shoulder to the tips of his
fingers." "Offal of a hyena!" shrieked Momaya.  "My child has been
stolen, and you, rotting fragment of a man, have taken him.  Return him
to me or I shall tear your eyes from your head and feed your heart to
the wild hogs."

Bukawai shrugged his shoulders.  "What do I know about your child?" he
asked.  "I have not taken him.  If he is stolen again, what should
Bukawai know of the matter? Did Bukawai steal him before? No, the white
jungle god stole him, and if he stole him once he would steal him
again.  It is nothing to me.  I returned him to you before and I have
come for my pay.  If he is gone and you would have him returned,
Bukawai will return him--for ten fat goats, a new sleeping mat and two
pieces of copper wire the length of a tall man's arm from the shoulder
to the tips of his fingers, and Bukawai will say nothing more about the
goats and the sleeping mat and the copper wire which you were to pay
for the first medicine."

"Ten fat goats!" screamed Momaya.  "I could not pay you ten fat goats
in as many years.  Ten fat goats, indeed!"

"Ten fat goats," repeated Bukawai.  "Ten fat goats, the new sleeping
mat and two pieces of copper wire the length of--"

Momaya stopped him with an impatient gesture.  "Wait!" she cried.  "I
have no goats.  You waste your breath.  Stay here while I go to my man.
He has but three goats, yet something may be done.  Wait!"

Bukawai sat down beneath a tree.  He felt quite content, for he knew
that he should have either payment or revenge.  He did not fear harm at
the hands of these people of another tribe, although he well knew that
they must fear and hate him.  His leprosy alone would prevent their
laying hands upon him, while his reputation as a witch-doctor rendered
him doubly immune from attack.  He was planning upon compelling them to
drive the ten goats to the mouth of his cave when Momaya returned.
With her were three warriors--Mbonga, the chief, Rabba Kega, the
village witch-doctor, and Ibeto, Tibo's father.  They were not pretty
men even under ordinary circumstances, and now, with their faces marked
by anger, they well might have inspired terror in the heart of anyone;
but if Bukawai felt any fear, he did not betray it.  Instead he greeted
them with an insolent stare, intended to awe them, as they came and
squatted in a semi-circle before him.

"Where is Ibeto's son?" asked Mbonga.

"How should I know?" returned Bukawai.  "Doubtless the white devil-god
has him.  If I am paid I will make strong medicine and then we shall
know where is Ibeto's son, and shall get him back again.  It was my
medicine which got him back the last time, for which I got no pay."

"I have my own witch-doctor to make medicine," replied Mbonga with
dignity.

Bukawai sneered and rose to his feet.  "Very well," he said, "let him
make his medicine and see if he can bring Ibeto's son back." He took a
few steps away from them, and then he turned angrily back.  "His
medicine will not bring the child back--that I know, and I also know
that when you find him it will be too late for any medicine to bring
him back, for he will be dead.  This have I just found out, the ghost
of my father's sister but now came to me and told me."

Now Mbonga and Rabba Kega might not take much stock in their own magic,
and they might even be skeptical as to the magic of another; but there
was always a chance of SOMETHING being in it, especially if it were not
their own.  Was it not well known that old Bukawai had speech with the
demons themselves and that two even lived with him in the forms of
hyenas! Still they must not accede too hastily.  There was the price to
be considered, and Mbonga had no intention of parting lightly with ten
goats to obtain the return of a single little boy who might die of
smallpox long before he reached a warrior's estate.

"Wait," said Mbonga.  "Let us see some of your magic, that we may know
if it be good magic.  Then we can talk about payment.  Rabba Kega will
make some magic, too.  We will see who makes the best magic.  Sit down,
Bukawai."

"The payment will be ten goats--fat goats--a new sleeping mat and two
pieces of copper wire the length of a tall man's arm from the shoulder
to the ends of his fingers, and it will be made in advance, the goats
being driven to my cave.  Then will I make the medicine, and on the
second day the boy will be returned to his mother.  It cannot be done
more quickly than that because it takes time to make such strong
medicine."

"Make us some medicine now," said Mbonga.  "Let us see what sort of
medicine you make."

"Bring me fire," replied Bukawai, "and I will make you a little magic."

Momaya was dispatched for the fire, and while she was away Mbonga
dickered with Bukawai about the price.  Ten goats, he said, was a high
price for an able-bodied warrior.  He also called Bukawai's attention
to the fact that he, Mbonga, was very poor, that his people were very
poor, and that ten goats were at least eight too many, to say nothing
of a new sleeping mat and the copper wire; but Bukawai was adamant.
His medicine was very expensive and he would have to give at least five
goats to the gods who helped him make it.  They were still arguing when
Momaya returned with the fire.

Bukawai placed a little on the ground before him, took a pinch of
powder from a pouch at his side and sprinkled it on the embers.  A
cloud of smoke rose with a puff.  Bukawai closed his eyes and rocked
back and forth.  Then he made a few passes in the air and pretended to
swoon.  Mbonga and the others were much impressed.  Rabba Kega grew
nervous.  He saw his reputation waning.  There was some fire left in
the vessel which Momaya had brought.  He seized the vessel, dropped a
handful of dry leaves into it while no one was watching and then
uttered a frightful scream which drew the attention of Bukawai's
audience to him.  It also brought Bukawai quite miraculously out of his
swoon, but when the old witch-doctor saw the reason for the disturbance
he quickly relapsed into unconsciousness before anyone discovered his
FAUX PAS.

Rabba Kega, seeing that he had the attention of Mbonga, Ibeto, and
Momaya, blew suddenly into the vessel, with the result that the leaves
commenced to smolder, and smoke issued from the mouth of the
receptacle.  Rabba Kega was careful to hold it so that none might see
the dry leaves.  Their eyes opened wide at this remarkable
demonstration of the village witch-doctor's powers.  The latter,
greatly elated, let himself out.  He shouted, jumped up and down, and
made frightful grimaces; then he put his face close over the mouth of
the vessel and appeared to be communing with the spirits within.

It was while he was thus engaged that Bukawai came out of his trance,
his curiosity finally having gotten the better of him.  No one was
paying him the slightest attention.  He blinked his one eye angrily,
then he, too, let out a loud roar, and when he was sure that Mbonga had
turned toward him, he stiffened rigidly and made spasmodic movements
with his arms and legs.

"I see him!" he cried.  "He is far away.  The white devil-god did not
get him.  He is alone and in great danger; but," he added, "if the ten
fat goats and the other things are paid to me quickly there is yet time
to save him."

Rabba Kega had paused to listen.  Mbonga looked toward him.  The chief
was in a quandary.  He did not know which medicine was the better.
"What does your magic tell you?" he asked of Rabba Kega.

"I, too, see him," screamed Rabba Kega; "but he is not where Bukawai
says he is.  He is dead at the bottom of the river."

At this Momaya commenced to howl loudly.


Tarzan had followed the spoor of the old man, the two hyenas, and the
little black boy to the mouth of the cave in the rocky canon between
the two hills.  Here he paused a moment before the sapling barrier
which Bukawai had set up, listening to the snarls and growls which came
faintly from the far recesses of the cavern.

Presently, mingled with the beastly cries, there came faintly to the
keen ears of the ape-man, the agonized moan of a child.  No longer did
Tarzan hesitate.  Hurling the door aside, he sprang into the dark
opening.  Narrow and black was the corridor; but long use of his eyes
in the Stygian blackness of the jungle nights had given to the ape-man
something of the nocturnal visionary powers of the wild things with
which he had consorted since babyhood.

He moved rapidly and yet with caution, for the place was dark,
unfamiliar and winding.  As he advanced, he heard more and more loudly
the savage snarls of the two hyenas, mingled with the scraping and
scratching of their paws upon wood.  The moans of a child grew in
volume, and Tarzan recognized in them the voice of the little black boy
he once had sought to adopt as his balu.

There was no hysteria in the ape-man's advance.  Too accustomed was he
to the passing of life in the jungle to be greatly wrought even by the
death of one whom he knew; but the lust for battle spurred him on.  He
was only a wild beast at heart and his wild beast's heart beat high in
anticipation of conflict.

In the rocky chamber of the hill's center, little Tibo crouched low
against the wall as far from the hunger-crazed beasts as he could drag
himself.  He saw the lattice giving to the frantic clawing of the
hyenas.  He knew that in a few minutes his little life would flicker
out horribly beneath the rending, yellow fangs of these loathsome
creatures.

Beneath the buffetings of the powerful bodies, the lattice sagged
inward, until, with a crash it gave way, letting the carnivora in upon
the boy.  Tibo cast one affrighted glance toward them, then closed his
eyes and buried his face in his arms, sobbing piteously.

For a moment the hyenas paused, caution and cowardice holding them from
their prey.  They stood thus glaring at the lad, then slowly,
stealthily, crouching, they crept toward him.  It was thus that Tarzan
came upon them, bursting into the chamber swiftly and silently; but not
so silently that the keen-eared beasts did not note his coming.  With
angry growls they turned from Tibo upon the ape-man, as, with a smile
upon his lips, he ran toward them.  For an instant one of the animals
stood its ground; but the ape-man did not deign even to draw his
hunting knife against despised Dango.  Rushing in upon the brute he
grasped it by the scruff of the neck, just as it attempted to dodge
past him, and hurled it across the cavern after its fellow which
already was slinking into the corridor, bent upon escape.

Then Tarzan picked Tibo from the floor, and when the child felt human
hands upon him instead of the paws and fangs of the hyenas, he rolled
his eyes upward in surprise and incredulity, and as they fell upon
Tarzan, sobs of relief broke from the childish lips and his hands
clutched at his deliverer as though the white devil-god was not the
most feared of jungle creatures.

When Tarzan came to the cave mouth the hyenas were nowhere in sight,
and after permitting Tibo to quench his thirst in the spring which rose
near by, he lifted the boy to his shoulders and set off toward the
jungle at a rapid trot, determined to still the annoying howlings of
Momaya as quickly as possible, for he shrewdly had guessed that the
absence of her balu was the cause of her lamentation.


"He is not dead at the bottom of the river," cried Bukawai.  "What does
this fellow know about making magic? Who is he, anyway, that he dare
say Bukawai's magic is not good magic? Bukawai sees Momaya's son.  He
is far away and alone and in great danger.  Hasten then with the ten
fat goats, the--"

But he got no further.  There was a sudden interruption from above,
from the branches of the very tree beneath which they squatted, and as
the five blacks looked up they almost swooned in fright as they saw the
great, white devil-god looking down upon them; but before they could
flee they saw another face, that of the lost little Tibo, and his face
was laughing and very happy.

And then Tarzan dropped fearlessly among them, the boy still upon his
back, and deposited him before his mother.  Momaya, Ibeto, Rabba Kega,
and Mbonga were all crowding around the lad trying to question him at
the same time.  Suddenly Momaya turned ferociously to fall upon
Bukawai, for the boy had told her all that he had suffered at the hands
of the cruel old man; but Bukawai was no longer there--he had required
no recourse to black art to assure him that the vicinity of Momaya
would be no healthful place for him after Tibo had told his story, and
now he was running through the jungle as fast as his old legs would
carry him toward the distant lair where he knew no black would dare
pursue him.

Tarzan, too, had vanished, as he had a way of doing, to the
mystification of the blacks.  Then Momaya's eyes lighted upon Rabba
Kega.  The village witch-doctor saw something in those eyes of hers
which boded no good to him, and backed away.

"So my Tibo is dead at the bottom of the river, is he?" the woman
shrieked.  "And he's far away and alone and in great danger, is he?
Magic!" The scorn which Momaya crowded into that single word would have
done credit to a Thespian of the first magnitude.  "Magic, indeed!" she
screamed.  "Momaya will show you some magic of her own," and with that
she seized upon a broken limb and struck Rabba Kega across the head.
With a howl of pain, the man turned and fled, Momaya pursuing him and
beating him across the shoulders, through the gateway and up the length
of the village street, to the intense amusement of the warriors, the
women, and the children who were so fortunate as to witness the
spectacle, for one and all feared Rabba Kega, and to fear is to hate.

Thus it was that to his host of passive enemies, Tarzan of the Apes
added that day two active foes, both of whom remained awake long into
the night planning means of revenge upon the white devil-god who had
brought them into ridicule and disrepute, but with their most
malevolent schemings was mingled a vein of real fear and awe that would
not down.

Young Lord Greystoke did not know that they planned against him, nor,
knowing, would have cared.  He slept as well that night as he did on
any other night, and though there was no roof above him, and no doors
to lock against intruders, he slept much better than his noble relative
in England, who had eaten altogether too much lobster and drank too
much wine at dinner that night.




                           7

                  The End of Bukawai

WHEN TARZAN OF the Apes was still but a boy he had learned, among other
things, to fashion pliant ropes of fibrous jungle grass.  Strong and
tough were the ropes of Tarzan, the little Tarmangani.  Tublat, his
foster father, would have told you this much and more.  Had you tempted
him with a handful of fat caterpillars he even might have sufficiently
unbended to narrate to you a few stories of the many indignities which
Tarzan had heaped upon him by means of his hated rope; but then Tublat
always worked himself into such a frightful rage when he devoted any
considerable thought either to the rope or to Tarzan, that it might not
have proved comfortable for you to have remained close enough to him to
hear what he had to say.

So often had that snakelike noose settled unexpectedly over Tublat's
head, so often had he been jerked ridiculously and painfully from his
feet when he was least looking for such an occurrence, that there is
little wonder he found scant space in his savage heart for love of his
white-skinned foster child, or the inventions thereof.  There had been
other times, too, when Tublat had swung helplessly in midair, the noose
tightening about his neck, death staring him in the face, and little
Tarzan dancing upon a near-by limb, taunting him and making unseemly
grimaces.

Then there had been another occasion in which the rope had figured
prominently--an occasion, and the only one connected with the rope,
which Tublat recalled with pleasure.  Tarzan, as active in brain as he
was in body, was always inventing new ways in which to play.  It was
through the medium of play that he learned much during his childhood.
This day he learned something, and that he did not lose his life in the
learning of it, was a matter of great surprise to Tarzan, and the fly
in the ointment, to Tublat.

The man-child had, in throwing his noose at a playmate in a tree above
him, caught a projecting branch instead.  When he tried to shake it
loose it but drew the tighter.  Then Tarzan started to climb the rope
to remove it from the branch.  When he was part way up a frolicsome
playmate seized that part of the rope which lay upon the ground and ran
off with it as far as he could go.  When Tarzan screamed at him to
desist, the young ape released the rope a little and then drew it tight
again.  The result was to impart a swinging motion to Tarzan's body
which the ape-boy suddenly realized was a new and pleasurable form of
play.  He urged the ape to continue until Tarzan was swinging to and
fro as far as the short length of rope would permit, but the distance
was not great enough, and, too, he was not far enough above the ground
to give the necessary thrills which add so greatly to the pastimes of
the young.

So he clambered to the branch where the noose was caught and after
removing it carried the rope far aloft and out upon a long and powerful
branch.  Here he again made it fast, and taking the loose end in his
hand, clambered quickly down among the branches as far as the rope
would permit him to go; then he swung out upon the end of it, his
lithe, young body turning and twisting--a human bob upon a pendulum of
grass--thirty feet above the ground.

Ah, how delectable! This was indeed a new play of the first magnitude.
Tarzan was entranced.  Soon he discovered that by wriggling his body in
just the right way at the proper time he could diminish or accelerate
his oscillation, and, being a boy, he chose, naturally, to accelerate.
Presently he was swinging far and wide, while below him, the apes of
the tribe of Kerchak looked on in mild amaze.

Had it been you or I swinging there at the end of that grass rope, the
thing which presently happened would not have happened, for we could
not have hung on so long as to have made it possible; but Tarzan was
quite as much at home swinging by his hands as he was standing upon his
feet, or, at least, almost.  At any rate he felt no fatigue long after
the time that an ordinary mortal would have been numb with the strain
of the physical exertion.  And this was his undoing.

Tublat was watching him as were others of the tribe.  Of all the
creatures of the wild, there was none Tublat so cordially hated as he
did this hideous, hairless, white-skinned, caricature of an ape.  But
for Tarzan's nimbleness, and the zealous watchfulness of savage Kala's
mother love, Tublat would long since have rid himself of this stain
upon his family escutcheon.  So long had it been since Tarzan became a
member of the tribe, that Tublat had forgotten the circumstances
surrounding the entrance of the jungle waif into his family, with the
result that he now imagined that Tarzan was his own offspring, adding
greatly to his chagrin.


Wide and far swung Tarzan of the Apes, until at last, as he reached the
highest point of the arc the rope, which rapidly had frayed on the
rough bark of the tree limb, parted suddenly.  The watching apes saw
the smooth, brown body shoot outward, and down, plummet-like. Tublat
leaped high in the air, emitting what in a human being would have been
an exclamation of delight.  This would be the end of Tarzan and most of
Tublat's troubles.  From now on he could lead his life in peace and
security.

Tarzan fell quite forty feet, alighting on his back in a thick bush.
Kala was the first to reach his side--ferocious, hideous, loving Kala.
She had seen the life crushed from her own balu in just such a fall
years before.  Was she to lose this one too in the same way? Tarzan was
lying quite still when she found him, embedded deeply in the bush.  It
took Kala several minutes to disentangle him and drag him forth; but he
was not killed.  He was not even badly injured.  The bush had broken
the force of the fall.  A cut upon the back of his head showed where he
had struck the tough stem of the shrub and explained his
unconsciousness.

In a few minutes he was as active as ever.  Tublat was furious.  In his
rage he snapped at a fellow-ape without first discovering the identity
of his victim, and was badly mauled for his ill temper, having chosen
to vent his spite upon a husky and belligerent young bull in the full
prime of his vigor.

But Tarzan had learned something new.  He had learned that continued
friction would wear through the strands of his rope, though it was many
years before this knowledge did more for him than merely to keep him
from swinging too long at a time, or too far above the ground at the
end of his rope.

The day came, however, when the very thing that had once all but killed
him proved the means of saving his life.

He was no longer a child, but a mighty jungle male.  There was none now
to watch over him, solicitously, nor did he need such.  Kala was dead.
Dead, too, was Tublat, and though with Kala passed the one creature
that ever really had loved him, there were still many who hated him
after Tublat departed unto the arms of his fathers.  It was not that he
was more cruel or more savage than they that they hated him, for though
he was both cruel and savage as were the beasts, his fellows, yet too
was he often tender, which they never were.  No, the thing which
brought Tarzan most into disrepute with those who did not like him, was
the possession and practice of a characteristic which they had not and
could not understand--the human sense of humor.  In Tarzan it was a
trifle broad, perhaps, manifesting itself in rough and painful
practical jokes upon his friends and cruel baiting of his enemies.

But to neither of these did he owe the enmity of Bukawai, the
witch-doctor, who dwelt in the cave between the two hills far to the
north of the village of Mbonga, the chief.  Bukawai was jealous of
Tarzan, and Bukawai it was who came near proving the undoing of the
ape-man. For months Bukawai had nursed his hatred while revenge seemed
remote indeed, since Tarzan of the Apes frequented another part of the
jungle, miles away from the lair of Bukawai.  Only once had the black
witch-doctor seen the devil-god, as he was most often called among the
blacks, and upon that occasion Tarzan had robbed him of a fat fee, at
the same time putting the lie in the mouth of Bukawai, and making his
medicine seem poor medicine.  All this Bukawai never could forgive,
though it seemed unlikely that the opportunity would come to be
revenged.

Yet it did come, and quite unexpectedly.  Tarzan was hunting far to the
north.  He had wandered away from the tribe, as he did more and more
often as he approached maturity, to hunt alone for a few days.  As a
child he had enjoyed romping and playing with the young apes, his
companions; but now these play-fellows of his had grown to surly,
lowering bulls, or to touchy, suspicious mothers, jealously guarding
helpless balus.  So Tarzan found in his own man-mind a greater and a
truer companionship than any or all of the apes of Kerchak could afford
him.

This day, as Tarzan hunted, the sky slowly became overcast.  Torn
clouds, whipped to ragged streamers, fled low above the tree tops.
They reminded Tarzan of frightened antelope fleeing the charge of a
hungry lion.  But though the light clouds raced so swiftly, the jungle
was motionless.  Not a leaf quivered and the silence was a great, dead
weight--insupportable.  Even the insects seemed stilled by apprehension
of some frightful thing impending, and the larger things were
soundless.  Such a forest, such a jungle might have stood there in the
beginning of that unthinkably far-gone age before God peopled the world
with life, when there were no sounds because there were no ears to hear.

And over all lay a sickly, pallid ocher light through which the
scourged clouds raced.  Tarzan had seen all these conditions many times
before, yet he never could escape a strange feeling at each recurrence
of them.  He knew no fear, but in the face of Nature's manifestations
of her cruel, immeasurable powers, he felt very small--very small and
very lonely.

Now he heard a low moaning, far away.  "The lions seek their prey," he
murmured to himself, looking up once again at the swift-flying clouds.
The moaning rose to a great volume of sound.  "They come!" said Tarzan
of the Apes, and sought the shelter of a thickly foliaged tree.  Quite
suddenly the trees bent their tops simultaneously as though God had
stretched a hand from the heavens and pressed His flat palm down upon
the world.  "They pass!" whispered Tarzan.  "The lions pass." Then came
a vivid flash of lightning, followed by deafening thunder.  "The lions
have sprung," cried Tarzan, "and now they roar above the bodies of
their kills."

The trees were waving wildly in all directions now, a perfectly
demoniacal wind threshed the jungle pitilessly.  In the midst of it the
rain came--not as it comes upon us of the northlands, but in a sudden,
choking, blinding deluge.  "The blood of the kill," thought Tarzan,
huddling himself closer to the bole of the great tree beneath which he
stood.

He was close to the edge of the jungle, and at a little distance he had
seen two hills before the storm broke; but now he could see nothing.
It amused him to look out into the beating rain, searching for the two
hills and imagining that the torrents from above had washed them away,
yet he knew that presently the rain would cease, the sun come out again
and all be as it was before, except where a few branches had fallen and
here and there some old and rotted patriarch had crashed back to enrich
the soil upon which he had fatted for, maybe, centuries.  All about him
branches and leaves filled the air or fell to earth, torn away by the
strength of the tornado and the weight of the water upon them.  A gaunt
corpse toppled and fell a few yards away; but Tarzan was protected from
all these dangers by the wide-spreading branches of the sturdy young
giant beneath which his jungle craft had guided him.  Here there was
but a single danger, and that a remote one.  Yet it came.  Without
warning the tree above him was riven by lightning, and when the rain
ceased and the sun came out Tarzan lay stretched as he had fallen, upon
his face amidst the wreckage of the jungle giant that should have
shielded him.

Bukawai came to the entrance of his cave after the rain and the storm
had passed and looked out upon the scene.  From his one eye Bukawai
could see; but had he had a dozen eyes he could have found no beauty in
the fresh sweetness of the revivified jungle, for to such things, in
the chemistry of temperament, his brain failed to react; nor, even had
he had a nose, which he had not for years, could he have found
enjoyment or sweetness in the clean-washed air.

At either side of the leper stood his sole and constant companions, the
two hyenas, sniffing the air.  Presently one of them uttered a low
growl and with flattened head started, sneaking and wary, toward the
jungle.  The other followed.  Bukawai, his curiosity aroused, trailed
after them, in his hand a heavy knob-stick.

The hyenas halted a few yards from the prostrate Tarzan, sniffing and
growling.  Then came Bukawai, and at first he could not believe the
witness of his own eyes; but when he did and saw that it was indeed the
devil-god his rage knew no bounds, for he thought him dead and himself
cheated of the revenge he had so long dreamed upon.

The hyenas approached the ape-man with bared fangs.  Bukawai, with an
inarticulate scream, rushed upon them, striking cruel and heavy blows
with his knob-stick, for there might still be life in the apparently
lifeless form.  The beasts, snapping and snarling, half turned upon
their master and their tormentor, but long fear still held them from
his putrid throat.  They slunk away a few yards and squatted upon their
haunches, hatred and baffled hunger gleaming from their savage eyes.

Bukawai stooped and placed his ear above the ape-man's heart.  It still
beat.  As well as his sloughed features could register pleasure they
did so; but it was not a pretty sight.  At the ape-man's side lay his
long, grass rope.  Quickly Bukawai bound the limp arms behind his
prisoner's back, then he raised him to one of his shoulders, for,
though Bukawai was old and diseased, he was still a strong man.  The
hyenas fell in behind as the witch-doctor set off toward the cave, and
through the long black corridors they followed as Bukawai bore his
victim into the bowels of the hills.  Through subterranean chambers,
connected by winding passageways, Bukawai staggered with his load.  At
a sudden turning of the corridor, daylight flooded them and Bukawai
stepped out into a small, circular basin in the hill, apparently the
crater of an ancient volcano, one of those which never reached the
dignity of a mountain and are little more than lava-rimmed pits closed
to the earth's surface.

Steep walls rimmed the cavity.  The only exit was through the
passageway by which Bukawai had entered.  A few stunted trees grew upon
the rocky floor.  A hundred feet above could be seen the ragged lips of
this cold, dead mouth of hell.

Bukawai propped Tarzan against a tree and bound him there with his own
grass rope, leaving his hands free but securing the knots in such a way
that the ape-man could not reach them.  The hyenas slunk to and fro,
growling.  Bukawai hated them and they hated him.  He knew that they
but waited for the time when he should be helpless, or when their
hatred should rise to such a height as to submerge their cringing fear
of him.

In his own heart was not a little fear of these repulsive creatures,
and because of that fear, Bukawai always kept the beasts well fed,
often hunting for them when their own forages for food failed, but ever
was he cruel to them with the cruelty of a little brain, diseased,
bestial, primitive.


He had had them since they were puppies.  They had known no other life
than that with him, and though they went abroad to hunt, always they
returned.  Of late Bukawai had come to believe that they returned not
so much from habit as from a fiendish patience which would submit to
every indignity and pain rather than forego the final vengeance, and
Bukawai needed but little imagination to picture what that vengeance
would be.  Today he would see for himself what his end would be; but
another should impersonate Bukawai.

When he had trussed Tarzan securely, Bukawai went back into the
corridor, driving the hyenas ahead of him, and pulling across the
opening a lattice of laced branches, which shut the pit from the cave
during the night that Bukawai might sleep in security, for then the
hyenas were penned in the crater that they might not sneak upon a
sleeping Bukawai in the darkness.

Bukawai returned to the outer cave mouth, filled a vessel with water at
the spring which rose in the little canon close at hand and returned
toward the pit.  The hyenas stood before the lattice looking hungrily
toward Tarzan.  They had been fed in this manner before.

With his water, the witch-doctor approached Tarzan and threw a portion
of the contents of the vessel in the ape-man's face.  There was
fluttering of the eyelids, and at the second application Tarzan opened
his eyes and looked about.

"Devil-god," cried Bukawai, "I am the great witch-doctor.  My medicine
is strong.  Yours is weak.  If it is not, why do you stay tied here
like a goat that is bait for lions?"

Tarzan understood nothing the witch-doctor said, therefore he did not
reply, but only stared straight at Bukawai with cold and level gaze.
The hyenas crept up behind him.  He heard them growl; but he did not
even turn his head.  He was a beast with a man's brain.  The beast in
him refused to show fear in the face of a death which the man-mind
already admitted to be inevitable.

Bukawai, not yet ready to give his victim to the beasts, rushed upon
the hyenas with his knob-stick. There was a short scrimmage in which
the brutes came off second best, as they always did.  Tarzan watched
it.  He saw and realized the hatred which existed between the two
animals and the hideous semblance of a man.

With the hyenas subdued, Bukawai returned to the baiting of Tarzan; but
finding that the ape-man understood nothing he said, the witch-doctor
finally desisted.  Then he withdrew into the corridor and pulled the
latticework barrier across the opening.  He went back into the cave and
got a sleeping mat, which he brought to the opening, that he might lie
down and watch the spectacle of his revenge in comfort.

The hyenas were sneaking furtively around the ape-man.  Tarzan strained
at his bonds for a moment, but soon realized that the rope he had
braided to hold Numa, the lion, would hold him quite as successfully.
He did not wish to die; but he could look death in the face now as he
had many times before without a quaver.

As he pulled upon the rope he felt it rub against the small tree about
which it was passed.  Like a flash of the cinematograph upon the
screen, a picture was flashed before his mind's eye from the storehouse
of his memory.  He saw a lithe, boyish figure swinging high above the
ground at the end of a rope.  He saw many apes watching from below, and
then he saw the rope part and the boy hurtle downward toward the
ground.  Tarzan smiled.  Immediately he commenced to draw the rope
rapidly back and forth across the tree trunk.

The hyenas, gaining courage, came closer.  They sniffed at his legs;
but when he struck at them with his free arms they slunk off.  He knew
that with the growth of hunger they would attack.  Coolly,
methodically, without haste, Tarzan drew the rope back and forth
against the rough trunk of the small tree.

In the entrance to the cavern Bukawai fell asleep.  He thought it would
be some time before the beasts gained sufficient courage or hunger to
attack the captive.  Their growls and the cries of the victim would
awaken him.  In the meantime he might as well rest, and he did.

Thus the day wore on, for the hyenas were not famished, and the rope
with which Tarzan was bound was a stronger one than that of his
boyhood, which had parted so quickly to the chafing of the rough tree
bark.  Yet, all the while hunger was growing upon the beasts and the
strands of the grass rope were wearing thinner and thinner.  Bukawai
slept.

It was late afternoon before one of the beasts, irritated by the
gnawing of appetite, made a quick, growling dash at the ape-man. The
noise awoke Bukawai.  He sat up quickly and watched what went on within
the crater.  He saw the hungry hyena charge the man, leaping for the
unprotected throat.  He saw Tarzan reach out and seize the growling
animal, and then he saw the second beast spring for the devil-god's
shoulder.  There was a mighty heave of the great, smooth-skinned body.
Rounded muscles shot into great, tensed piles beneath the brown
hide--the ape-man surged forward with all his weight and all his great
strength--the bonds parted, and the three were rolling upon the floor
of the crater snarling, snapping, and rending.

Bukawai leaped to his feet.  Could it be that the devil-god was to
prevail against his servants? Impossible! The creature was unarmed, and
he was down with two hyenas on top of him; but Bukawai did not know
Tarzan.

The ape-man fastened his fingers upon the throat of one of the hyenas
and rose to one knee, though the other beast tore at him frantically in
an effort to pull him down.  With a single hand Tarzan held the one,
and with the other hand he reached forth and pulled toward him the
second beast.

And then Bukawai, seeing the battle going against his forces, rushed
forward from the cavern brandishing his knob-stick.  Tarzan saw him
coming, and rising now to both feet, a hyena in each hand, he hurled
one of the foaming beasts straight at the witch-doctor's head.  Down
went the two in a snarling, biting heap.  Tarzan tossed the second
hyena across the crater, while the first gnawed at the rotting face of
its master; but this did not suit the ape-man.  With a kick he sent the
beast howling after its companion, and springing to the side of the
prostrate witch-doctor, dragged him to his feet.

Bukawai, still conscious, saw death, immediate and terrible, in the
cold eyes of his captor, so he turned upon Tarzan with teeth and nails.
The ape-man shuddered at the proximity of that raw face to his.  The
hyenas had had enough and disappeared through the small aperture
leading into the cave.  Tarzan had little difficulty in overpowering
and binding Bukawai.  Then he led him to the very tree to which he had
been bound; but in binding Bukawai, Tarzan saw to it that escape after
the same fashion that he had escaped would be out of the question; then
he left him.

As he passed through the winding corridors and the subterranean
apartments, Tarzan saw nothing of the hyenas.

"They will return," he said to himself.

In the crater between the towering walls Bukawai, cold with terror,
trembled, trembled as with ague.

"They will return!" he cried, his voice rising to a fright-filled
shriek.

And they did.




                           8

                       The Lion

NUMA, THE LION, crouched behind a thorn bush close beside the drinking
pool where the river eddied just below the bend.  There was a ford
there and on either bank a well-worn trail, broadened far out at the
river's brim, where, for countless centuries, the wild things of the
jungle and of the plains beyond had come down to drink, the carnivora
with bold and fearless majesty, the herbivora timorous, hesitating,
fearful.

Numa, the lion, was hungry, he was very hungry, and so he was quite
silent now.  On his way to the drinking place he had moaned often and
roared not a little; but as he neared the spot where he would lie in
wait for Bara, the deer, or Horta, the boar, or some other of the many
luscious-fleshed creatures who came hither to drink, he was silent.  It
was a grim, a terrible silence, shot through with yellow-green light of
ferocious eyes, punctuated with undulating tremors of sinuous tail.

It was Pacco, the zebra, who came first, and Numa, the lion, could
scarce restrain a roar of anger, for of all the plains people, none are
more wary than Pacco, the zebra.  Behind the black-striped stallion
came a herd of thirty or forty of the plump and vicious little
horselike beasts.  As he neared the river, the leader paused often,
cocking his ears and raising his muzzle to sniff the gentle breeze for
the tell-tale scent spoor of the dread flesh-eaters.

Numa shifted uneasily, drawing his hind quarters far beneath his tawny
body, gathering himself for the sudden charge and the savage assault.
His eyes shot hungry fire.  His great muscles quivered to the
excitement of the moment.

Pacco came a little nearer, halted, snorted, and wheeled.  There was a
pattering of scurrying hoofs and the herd was gone; but Numa, the lion,
moved not.  He was familiar with the ways of Pacco, the zebra.  He knew
that he would return, though many times he might wheel and fly before
he summoned the courage to lead his harem and his offspring to the
water.  There was the chance that Pacco might be frightened off
entirely.  Numa had seen this happen before, and so he became almost
rigid lest he be the one to send them galloping, waterless, back to the
plain.

Again and again came Pacco and his family, and again and again did they
turn and flee; but each time they came closer to the river, until at
last the plump stallion dipped his velvet muzzle daintily into the
water.  The others, stepping warily, approached their leader.  Numa
selected a sleek, fat filly and his flaming eyes burned greedily as
they feasted upon her, for Numa, the lion, loves scarce anything better
than the meat of Pacco, perhaps because Pacco is, of all the
grass-eaters, the most difficult to catch.

Slowly the lion rose, and as he rose, a twig snapped beneath one of his
great, padded paws.  Like a shot from a rifle he charged upon the
filly; but the snapped twig had been enough to startle the timorous
quarry, so that they were in instant flight simultaneously with Numa's
charge.

The stallion was last, and with a prodigious leap, the lion catapulted
through the air to seize him; but the snapping twig had robbed Numa of
his dinner, though his mighty talons raked the zebra's glossy rump,
leaving four crimson bars across the beautiful coat.

It was an angry Numa that quitted the river and prowled, fierce,
dangerous, and hungry, into the jungle.  Far from particular now was
his appetite.  Even Dango, the hyena, would have seemed a tidbit to
that ravenous maw.  And in this temper it was that the lion came upon
the tribe of Kerchak, the great ape.

One does not look for Numa, the lion, this late in the morning.  He
should be lying up asleep beside his last night's kill by now; but Numa
had made no kill last night.  He was still hunting, hungrier than ever.

The anthropoids were idling about the clearing, the first keen desire
of the morning's hunger having been satisfied.  Numa scented them long
before he saw them.  Ordinarily he would have turned away in search of
other game, for even Numa respected the mighty muscles and the sharp
fangs of the great bulls of the tribe of Kerchak, but today he kept on
steadily toward them, his bristled snout wrinkled into a savage snarl.

Without an instant's hesitation, Numa charged the moment he reached a
point from where the apes were visible to him.  There were a dozen or
more of the hairy, manlike creatures upon the ground in a little glade.
In a tree at one side sat a brown-skinned youth.  He saw Numa's swift
charge; he saw the apes turn and flee, huge bulls trampling upon little
balus; only a single she held her ground to meet the charge, a young
she inspired by new motherhood to the great sacrifice that her balu
might escape.

Tarzan leaped from his perch, screaming at the flying bulls beneath and
at those who squatted in the safety of surrounding trees.  Had the
bulls stood their ground, Numa would not have carried through that
charge unless goaded by great rage or the gnawing pangs of starvation.
Even then he would not have come off unscathed.

If the bulls heard, they were too slow in responding, for Numa had
seized the mother ape and dragged her into the jungle before the males
had sufficiently collected their wits and their courage to rally in
defense of their fellow.  Tarzan's angry voice aroused similar anger in
the breasts of the apes.  Snarling and barking they followed Numa into
the dense labyrinth of foliage wherein he sought to hide himself from
them.  The ape-man was in the lead, moving rapidly and yet with
caution, depending even more upon his ears and nose than upon his eyes
for information of the lion's whereabouts.

The spoor was easy to follow, for the dragged body of the victim left a
plain trail, blood-spattered and scentful.  Even such dull creatures as
you or I might easily have followed it.  To Tarzan and the apes of
Kerchak it was as obvious as a cement sidewalk.

Tarzan knew that they were nearing the great cat even before he heard
an angry growl of warning just ahead.  Calling to the apes to follow
his example, he swung into a tree and a moment later Numa was
surrounded by a ring of growling beasts, well out of reach of his fangs
and talons but within plain sight of him.  The carnivore crouched with
his fore-quarters upon the she-ape. Tarzan could see that the latter
was already dead; but something within him made it seem quite necessary
to rescue the useless body from the clutches of the enemy and to punish
him.

He shrieked taunts and insults at Numa, and tearing dead branches from
the tree in which he danced, hurled them at the lion.  The apes
followed his example.  Numa roared out in rage and vexation.  He was
hungry, but under such conditions he could not feed.

The apes, if they had been left to themselves, would doubtless soon
have left the lion to peaceful enjoyment of his feast, for was not the
she dead? They could not restore her to life by throwing sticks at
Numa, and they might even now be feeding in quiet themselves; but
Tarzan was of a different mind.  Numa must be punished and driven away.
He must be taught that even though he killed a Mangani, he would not be
permitted to feed upon his kill.  The man-mind looked into the future,
while the apes perceived only the immediate present.  They would be
content to escape today the menace of Numa, while Tarzan saw the
necessity, and the means as well, of safeguarding the days to come.

So he urged the great anthropoids on until Numa was showered with
missiles that kept his head dodging and his voice pealing forth its
savage protest; but still he clung desperately to his kill.

The twigs and branches hurled at Numa, Tarzan soon realized, did not
hurt him greatly even when they struck him, and did not injure him at
all, so the ape-man looked about for more effective missiles, nor did
he have to look long.  An out-cropping of decomposed granite not far
from Numa suggested ammunition of a much more painful nature.  Calling
to the apes to watch him, Tarzan slipped to the ground and gathered a
handful of small fragments.  He knew that when once they had seen him
carry out his idea they would be much quicker to follow his lead than
to obey his instructions, were he to command them to procure pieces of
rock and hurl them at Numa, for Tarzan was not then king of the apes of
the tribe of Kerchak.  That came in later years.  Now he was but a
youth, though one who already had wrested for himself a place in the
councils of the savage beasts among whom a strange fate had cast him.
The sullen bulls of the older generation still hated him as beasts hate
those of whom they are suspicious, whose scent characteristic is the
scent characteristic of an alien order and, therefore, of an enemy
order.  The younger bulls, those who had grown up through childhood as
his playmates, were as accustomed to Tarzan's scent as to that of any
other member of the tribe.  They felt no greater suspicion of him than
of any other bull of their acquaintance; yet they did not love him, for
they loved none outside the mating season, and the animosities aroused
by other bulls during that season lasted well over until the next.
They were a morose and peevish band at best, though here and there were
those among them in whom germinated the primal seeds of
humanity--reversions to type, these, doubtless; reversions to the
ancient progenitor who took the first step out of ape-hood toward
humanness, when he walked more often upon his hind feet and discovered
other things for idle hands to do.

So now Tarzan led where he could not yet command.  He had long since
discovered the apish propensity for mimicry and learned to make use of
it.  Having filled his arms with fragments of rotted granite, he
clambered again into a tree, and it pleased him to see that the apes
had followed his example.

During the brief respite while they were gathering their ammunition,
Numa had settled himself to feed; but scarce had he arranged himself
and his kill when a sharp piece of rock hurled by the practiced hand of
the ape-man struck him upon the cheek.  His sudden roar of pain and
rage was smothered by a volley from the apes, who had seen Tarzan's
act.  Numa shook his massive head and glared upward at his tormentors.
For a half hour they pursued him with rocks and broken branches, and
though he dragged his kill into densest thickets, yet they always found
a way to reach him with their missiles, giving him no opportunity to
feed, and driving him on and on.

The hairless ape-thing with the man scent was worst of all, for he had
even the temerity to advance upon the ground to within a few yards of
the Lord of the Jungle, that he might with greater accuracy and force
hurl the sharp bits of granite and the heavy sticks at him.  Time and
again did Numa charge--sudden, vicious charges--but the lithe, active
tormentor always managed to elude him and with such insolent ease that
the lion forgot even his great hunger in the consuming passion of his
rage, leaving his meat for considerable spaces of time in vain efforts
to catch his enemy.

The apes and Tarzan pursued the great beast to a natural clearing,
where Numa evidently determined to make a last stand, taking up his
position in the center of the open space, which was far enough from any
tree to render him practically immune from the rather erratic throwing
of the apes, though Tarzan still found him with most persistent and
aggravating frequency.

This, however, did not suit the ape-man, since Numa now suffered an
occasional missile with no more than a snarl, while he settled himself
to partake of his delayed feast.  Tarzan scratched his head, pondering
some more effective method of offense, for he had determined to prevent
Numa from profiting in any way through his attack upon the tribe.  The
man-mind reasoned against the future, while the shaggy apes thought
only of their present hatred of this ancestral enemy.  Tarzan guessed
that should Numa find it an easy thing to snatch a meal from the tribe
of Kerchak, it would be but a short time before their existence would
be one living nightmare of hideous watchfulness and dread.  Numa must
be taught that the killing of an ape brought immediate punishment and
no rewards.  It would take but a few lessons to insure the former
safety of the tribe.  This must be some old lion whose failing strength
and agility had forced him to any prey that he could catch; but even a
single lion, undisputed, could exterminate the tribe, or at least make
its existence so precarious and so terrifying that life would no longer
be a pleasant condition.

"Let him hunt among the Gomangani," thought Tarzan.  "He will find them
easier prey.  I will teach ferocious Numa that he may not hunt the
Mangani."

But how to wrest the body of his victim from the feeding lion was the
first question to be solved.  At last Tarzan hit upon a plan.  To
anyone but Tarzan of the Apes it might have seemed rather a risky plan,
and perhaps it did even to him; but Tarzan rather liked things that
contained a considerable element of danger.  At any rate, I rather
doubt that you or I would have chosen a similar plan for foiling an
angry and a hungry lion.

Tarzan required assistance in the scheme he had hit upon and his
assistant must be equally as brave and almost as active as he.  The
ape-man's eyes fell upon Taug, the playmate of his childhood, the rival
in his first love and now, of all the bulls of the tribe, the only one
that might be thought to hold in his savage brain any such feeling
toward Tarzan as we describe among ourselves as friendship.  At least,
Tarzan knew, Taug was courageous, and he was young and agile and
wonderfully muscled.

"Taug!" cried the ape-man. The great ape looked up from a dead limb he
was attempting to tear from a lightning-blasted tree.  "Go close to
Numa and worry him," said Tarzan.  "Worry him until he charges.  Lead
him away from the body of Mamka.  Keep him away as long as you can."

Taug nodded.  He was across the clearing from Tarzan.  Wresting the
limb at last from the tree he dropped to the ground and advanced toward
Numa, growling and barking out his insults.  The worried lion looked up
and rose to his feet.  His tail went stiffly erect and Taug turned in
flight, for he knew that warming signal of the charge.

From behind the lion, Tarzan ran quickly toward the center of the
clearing and the body of Mamka.  Numa, all his eyes for Taug, did not
see the ape-man. Instead he shot forward after the fleeing bull, who
had turned in flight not an instant too soon, since he reached the
nearest tree but a yard or two ahead of the pursuing demon.  Like a cat
the heavy anthropoid scampered up the bole of his sanctuary.  Numa's
talons missed him by little more than inches.

For a moment the lion paused beneath the tree, glaring up at the ape
and roaring until the earth trembled, then he turned back again toward
his kill, and as he did so, his tail shot once more to rigid erectness
and he charged back even more ferociously than he had come, for what he
saw was the naked man-thing running toward the farther trees with the
bloody carcass of his prey across a giant shoulder.

The apes, watching the grim race from the safety of the trees, screamed
taunts at Numa and warnings to Tarzan.  The high sun, hot and
brilliant, fell like a spotlight upon the actors in the little
clearing, portraying them in glaring relief to the audience in the
leafy shadows of the surrounding trees.  The light-brown body of the
naked youth, all but hidden by the shaggy carcass of the killed ape,
the red blood streaking his smooth hide, his muscles rolling, velvety,
beneath.  Behind him the black-maned lion, head flattened, tail
extended, racing, a jungle thoroughbred, across the sunlit clearing.

Ah, but this was life! With death at his heels, Tarzan thrilled with
the joy of such living as this; but would he reach the trees ahead of
the rampant death so close behind?

Gunto swung from a limb in a tree before him.  Gunto was screaming
warnings and advice.

"Catch me!" cried Tarzan, and with his heavy burden leaped straight for
the big bull hanging there by his hind feet and one forepaw.  And Gunto
caught them--the big ape-man and the dead weight of the slain
she-ape--caught them with one great, hairy paw and whirled them upward
until Tarzan's fingers closed upon a near-by branch.

Beneath, Numa leaped; but Gunto, heavy and awkward as he may have
appeared, was as quick as Manu, the monkey, so that the lion's talons
but barely grazed him, scratching a bloody streak beneath one hairy arm.

Tarzan carried Mamka's corpse to a high crotch, where even Sheeta, the
panther, could not get it.  Numa paced angrily back and forth beneath
the tree, roaring frightfully.  He had been robbed of his kill and his
revenge also.  He was very savage indeed; but his despoilers were well
out of his reach, and after hurling a few taunts and missiles at him
they swung away through the trees, fiercely reviling him.

Tarzan thought much upon the little adventure of that day.  He foresaw
what might happen should the great carnivora of the jungle turn their
serious attention upon the tribe of Kerchak, the great ape, but equally
he thought upon the wild scramble of the apes for safety when Numa
first charged among them.  There is little humor in the jungle that is
not grim and awful.  The beasts have little or no conception of humor;
but the young Englishman saw humor in many things which presented no
humorous angle to his associates.

Since earliest childhood he had been a searcher after fun, much to the
sorrow of his fellow-apes, and now he saw the humor of the frightened
panic of the apes and the baffled rage of Numa even in this grim jungle
adventure which had robbed Mamka of life, and jeopardized that of many
members of the tribe.

It was but a few weeks later that Sheeta, the panther, made a sudden
rush among the tribe and snatched a little balu from a tree where it
had been hidden while its mother sought food.  Sheeta got away with his
small prize unmolested.  Tarzan was very wroth.  He spoke to the bulls
of the ease with which Numa and Sheeta, in a single moon, had slain two
members of the tribe.

"They will take us all for food," he cried.  "We hunt as we will
through the jungle, paying no heed to approaching enemies.  Even Manu,
the monkey, does not so.  He keeps two or three always watching for
enemies.  Pacco, the zebra, and Wappi, the antelope, have those about
the herd who keep watch while the others feed, while we, the great
Mangani, let Numa, and Sabor, and Sheeta come when they will and carry
us off to feed their balus.

"Gr-r-rmph," said Numgo.

"What are we to do?" asked Taug.

"We, too, should have two or three always watching for the approach of
Numa, and Sabor, and Sheeta," replied Tarzan.  "No others need we fear,
except Histah, the snake, and if we watch for the others we will see
Histah if he comes, though gliding ever so silently."

And so it was that the great apes of the tribe of Kerchak posted
sentries thereafter, who watched upon three sides while the tribe
hunted, scattered less than had been their wont.

But Tarzan went abroad alone, for Tarzan was a man-thing and sought
amusement and adventure and such humor as the grim and terrible jungle
offers to those who know it and do not fear it--a weird humor shot with
blazing eyes and dappled with the crimson of lifeblood.  While others
sought only food and love, Tarzan of the Apes sought food and joy.

One day he hovered above the palisaded village of Mbonga, the chief,
the jet cannibal of the jungle primeval.  He saw, as he had seen many
times before, the witch-doctor, Rabba Kega, decked out in the head and
hide of Gorgo, the buffalo.  It amused Tarzan to see a Gomangani
parading as Gorgo; but it suggested nothing in particular to him until
he chanced to see stretched against the side of Mbonga's hut the skin
of a lion with the head still on.  Then a broad grin widened the
handsome face of the savage beast-youth.

Back into the jungle he went until chance, agility, strength, and
cunning backed by his marvelous powers of perception, gave him an easy
meal.  If Tarzan felt that the world owed him a living he also realized
that it was for him to collect it, nor was there ever a better
collector than this son of an English lord, who knew even less of the
ways of his forbears than he did of the forbears themselves, which was
nothing.

It was quite dark when Tarzan returned to the village of Mbonga and
took his now polished perch in the tree which overhangs the palisade
upon one side of the walled enclosure.  As there was nothing in
particular to feast upon in the village there was little life in the
single street, for only an orgy of flesh and native beer could draw out
the people of Mbonga.  Tonight they sat gossiping about their cooking
fires, the older members of the tribe; or, if they were young, paired
off in the shadows cast by the palm-thatched huts.

Tarzan dropped lightly into the village, and sneaking stealthily in the
concealment of the denser shadows, approached the hut of the chief,
Mbonga.  Here he found that which he sought.  There were warriors all
about him; but they did not know that the feared devil-god slunk
noiselessly so near them, nor did they see him possess himself of that
which he coveted and depart from their village as noiselessly as he had
come.

Later that night, as Tarzan curled himself for sleep, he lay for a long
time looking up at the burning planets and the twinkling stars and at
Goro the moon, and he smiled.  He recalled how ludicrous the great
bulls had appeared in their mad scramble for safety that day when Numa
had charged among them and seized Mamka, and yet he knew them to be
fierce and courageous.  It was the sudden shock of surprise that always
sent them into a panic; but of this Tarzan was not as yet fully aware.
That was something he was to learn in the near future.

He fell asleep with a broad grin upon his face.

Manu, the monkey, awoke him in the morning by dropping discarded bean
pods upon his upturned face from a branch a short distance above him.
Tarzan looked up and smiled.  He had been awakened thus before many
times.  He and Manu were fairly good friends, their friendship
operating upon a reciprocal basis.  Sometimes Manu would come running
early in the morning to awaken Tarzan and tell him that Bara, the deer,
was feeding close at hand, or that Horta, the boar, was asleep in a
mudhole hard by, and in return Tarzan broke open the shells of the
harder nuts and fruits for Manu, or frightened away Histah, the snake,
and Sheeta, the panther.

The sun had been up for some time, and the tribe had already wandered
off in search of food.  Manu indicated the direction they had taken
with a wave of his hand and a few piping notes of his squeaky little
voice.

"Come, Manu," said Tarzan, "and you will see that which shall make you
dance for joy and squeal your wrinkled little head off.  Come, follow
Tarzan of the Apes."

With that he set off in the direction Manu had indicated and above him,
chattering, scolding and squealing, skipped Manu, the monkey.  Across
Tarzan's shoulders was the thing he had stolen from the village of
Mbonga, the chief, the evening before.

The tribe was feeding in the forest beside the clearing where Gunto,
and Taug, and Tarzan had so harassed Numa and finally taken away from
him the fruit of his kill.  Some of them were in the clearing itself.
In peace and content they fed, for were there not three sentries, each
watching upon a different side of the herd? Tarzan had taught them
this, and though he had been away for several days hunting alone, as he
often did, or visiting at the cabin by the sea, they had not as yet
forgotten his admonitions, and if they continued for a short time
longer to post sentries, it would become a habit of their tribal life
and thus be perpetuated indefinitely.

But Tarzan, who knew them better than they knew themselves, was
confident that they had ceased to place the watchers about them the
moment that he had left them, and now he planned not only to have a
little fun at their expense but to teach them a lesson in preparedness,
which, by the way, is even a more vital issue in the jungle than in
civilized places.  That you and I exist today must be due to the
preparedness of some shaggy anthropoid of the Oligocene.  Of course the
apes of Kerchak were always prepared, after their own way--Tarzan had
merely suggested a new and additional safeguard.

Gunto was posted today to the north of the clearing.  He squatted in
the fork of a tree from where he might view the jungle for quite a
distance about him.  It was he who first discovered the enemy.  A
rustling in the undergrowth attracted his attention, and a moment later
he had a partial view of a shaggy mane and tawny yellow back.  Just a
glimpse it was through the matted foliage beneath him; but it brought
from Gunto's leathern lungs a shrill "Kreeg-ah!" which is the ape for
beware, or danger.

Instantly the tribe took up the cry until "Kreeg-ahs!" rang through the
jungle about the clearing as apes swung quickly to places of safety
among the lower branches of the trees and the great bulls hastened in
the direction of Gunto.

And then into the clearing strode Numa, the lion--majestic and mighty,
and from a deep chest issued the moan and the cough and the rumbling
roar that set stiff hairs to bristling from shaggy craniums down the
length of mighty spines.

Inside the clearing, Numa paused and on the instant there fell upon him
from the trees near by a shower of broken rock and dead limbs torn from
age-old trees.  A dozen times he was hit, and then the apes ran down
and gathered other rocks, pelting him unmercifully.

Numa turned to flee, but his way was barred by a fusilade of
sharp-cornered missiles, and then, upon the edge of the clearing, great
Taug met him with a huge fragment of rock as large as a man's head, and
down went the Lord of the Jungle beneath the stunning blow.

With shrieks and roars and loud barkings the great apes of the tribe of
Kerchak rushed upon the fallen lion.  Sticks and stones and yellow
fangs menaced the still form.  In another moment, before he could
regain consciousness, Numa would be battered and torn until only a
bloody mass of broken bones and matted hair remained of what had once
been the most dreaded of jungle creatures.

But even as the sticks and stones were raised above him and the great
fangs bared to tear him, there descended like a plummet from the trees
above a diminutive figure with long, white whiskers and a wrinkled
face.  Square upon the body of Numa it alighted and there it danced and
screamed and shrieked out its challenge against the bulls of Kerchak.

For an instant they paused, paralyzed by the wonder of the thing.  It
was Manu, the monkey, Manu, the little coward, and here he was daring
the ferocity of the great Mangani, hopping about upon the carcass of
Numa, the lion, and crying out that they must not strike it again.

And when the bulls paused, Manu reached down and seized a tawny ear.
With all his little might he tugged upon the heavy head until slowly it
turned back, revealing the tousled, black head and clean-cut profile of
Tarzan of the Apes.

Some of the older apes were for finishing what they had commenced; but
Taug, sullen, mighty Taug, sprang quickly to the ape-man's side and
straddling the unconscious form warned back those who would have struck
his childhood playmate.  And Teeka, his mate, came too, taking her
place with bared fangs at Taug's side.  Others followed their example,
until at last Tarzan was surrounded by a ring of hairy champions who
would permit no enemy to approach him.

It was a surprised and chastened Tarzan who opened his eyes to
consciousness a few minutes later.  He looked about him at the
surrounding apes and slowly there returned to him a realization of what
had occurred.

Gradually a broad grin illuminated his features.  His bruises were many
and they hurt; but the good that had come from his adventure was worth
all that it had cost.  He had learned, for instance, that the apes of
Kerchak had heeded his teaching, and he had learned that he had good
friends among the sullen beasts whom he had thought without sentiment.
He had discovered that Manu, the monkey--even little, cowardly
Manu--had risked his life in his defense.

It made Tarzan very glad to know these things; but at the other lesson
he had been taught he reddened.  He had always been a joker, the only
joker in the grim and terrible company; but now as he lay there half
dead from his hurts, he almost swore a solemn oath forever to forego
practical joking--almost; but not quite.




                           9

                     The Nightmare

THE BLACKS OF the village of Mbonga, the chief, were feasting, while
above them in a large tree sat Tarzan of the Apes--grim, terrible,
empty, and envious.  Hunting had proved poor that day, for there are
lean days as well as fat ones for even the greatest of the jungle
hunters.  Oftentimes Tarzan went empty for more than a full sun, and he
had passed through entire moons during which he had been but barely
able to stave off starvation; but such times were infrequent.

There once had been a period of sickness among the grass-eaters which
had left the plains almost bare of game for several years, and again
the great cats had increased so rapidly and so overrun the country that
their prey, which was also Tarzan's, had been frightened off for a
considerable time.

But for the most part Tarzan had fed well always.  Today, though, he
had gone empty, one misfortune following another as rapidly as he
raised new quarry, so that now, as he sat perched in the tree above the
feasting blacks, he experienced all the pangs of famine and his hatred
for his lifelong enemies waxed strong in his breast.  It was
tantalizing, indeed, to sit there hungry while these Gomangani filled
themselves so full of food that their stomachs seemed almost upon the
point of bursting, and with elephant steaks at that!

It was true that Tarzan and Tantor were the best of friends, and that
Tarzan never yet had tasted of the flesh of the elephant; but the
Gomangani evidently had slain one, and as they were eating of the flesh
of their kill, Tarzan was assailed by no doubts as to the ethics of his
doing likewise, should he have the opportunity.  Had he known that the
elephant had died of sickness several days before the blacks discovered
the carcass, he might not have been so keen to partake of the feast,
for Tarzan of the Apes was no carrion-eater. Hunger, however, may blunt
the most epicurean taste, and Tarzan was not exactly an epicure.

What he was at this moment was a very hungry wild beast whom caution
was holding in leash, for the great cooking pot in the center of the
village was surrounded by black warriors, through whom not even Tarzan
of the Apes might hope to pass unharmed.  It would be necessary,
therefore, for the watcher to remain there hungry until the blacks had
gorged themselves to stupor, and then, if they had left any scraps, to
make the best meal he could from such; but to the impatient Tarzan it
seemed that the greedy Gomangani would rather burst than leave the
feast before the last morsel had been devoured.  For a time they broke
the monotony of eating by executing portions of a hunting dance, a
maneuver which sufficiently stimulated digestion to permit them to fall
to once more with renewed vigor; but with the consumption of appalling
quantities of elephant meat and native beer they presently became too
loggy for physical exertion of any sort, some reaching a stage where
they no longer could rise from the ground, but lay conveniently close
to the great cooking pot, stuffing themselves into unconsciousness.

It was well past midnight before Tarzan even could begin to see the end
of the orgy.  The blacks were now falling asleep rapidly; but a few
still persisted.  From before their condition Tarzan had no doubt but
that he easily could enter the village and snatch a handful of meat
from before their noses; but a handful was not what he wanted.  Nothing
less than a stomachful would allay the gnawing craving of that great
emptiness.  He must therefore have ample time to forage in peace.

At last but a single warrior remained true to his ideals--an old
fellow whose once wrinkled belly was now as smooth and as tight as the
head of a drum.  With evidences of great discomfort, and even pain, he
would crawl toward the pot and drag himself slowly to his knees, from
which position he could reach into the receptacle and seize a piece of
meat.  Then he would roll over on his back with a loud groan and lie
there while he slowly forced the food between his teeth and down into
his gorged stomach.

It was evident to Tarzan that the old fellow would eat until he died,
or until there was no more meat.  The ape-man shook his head in
disgust.  What foul creatures were these Gomangani? Yet of all the
jungle folk they alone resembled Tarzan closely in form.  Tarzan was a
man, and they, too, must be some manner of men, just as the little
monkeys, and the great apes, and Bolgani, the gorilla, were quite
evidently of one great family, though differing in size and appearance
and customs.  Tarzan was ashamed, for of all the beasts of the jungle,
then, man was the most disgusting--man and Dango, the hyena.  Only man
and Dango ate until they swelled up like a dead rat.  Tarzan had seen
Dango eat his way into the carcass of a dead elephant and then continue
to eat so much that he had been unable to get out of the hole through
which he had entered.  Now he could readily believe that man, given the
opportunity, would do the same.  Man, too, was the most unlovely of
creatures--with his skinny legs and his big stomach, his filed teeth,
and his thick, red lips.  Man was disgusting.  Tarzan's gaze was
riveted upon the hideous old warrior wallowing in filth beneath him.

There! the thing was struggling to its knees to reach for another
morsel of flesh.  It groaned aloud in pain and yet it persisted in
eating, eating, ever eating.  Tarzan could endure it no longer--neither
his hunger nor his disgust.  Silently he slipped to the ground with the
bole of the great tree between himself and the feaster.

The man was still kneeling, bent almost double in agony, before the
cooking pot.  His back was toward the ape-man.  Swiftly and noiselessly
Tarzan approached him.  There was no sound as steel fingers closed
about the black throat.  The struggle was short, for the man was old
and already half stupefied from the effects of the gorging and the beer.

Tarzan dropped the inert mass and scooped several large pieces of meat
from the cooking pot--enough to satisfy even his great hunger--then he
raised the body of the feaster and shoved it into the vessel.  When the
other blacks awoke they would have something to think about! Tarzan
grinned.  As he turned toward the tree with his meat, he picked up a
vessel containing beer and raised it to his lips, but at the first
taste he spat the stuff from his mouth and tossed the primitive tankard
aside.  He was quite sure that even Dango would draw the line at such
filthy tasting drink as that, and his contempt for man increased with
the conviction.

Tarzan swung off into the jungle some half mile or so before he paused
to partake of his stolen food.  He noticed that it gave forth a strange
and unpleasant odor, but assumed that this was due to the fact that it
had stood in a vessel of water above a fire.  Tarzan was, of course,
unaccustomed to cooked food.  He did not like it; but he was very
hungry and had eaten a considerable portion of his haul before it was
really borne in upon him that the stuff was nauseating.  It required
far less than he had imagined it would to satisfy his appetite.

Throwing the balance to the ground he curled up in a convenient crotch
and sought slumber; but slumber seemed difficult to woo.  Ordinarily
Tarzan of the Apes was asleep as quickly as a dog after it curls itself
upon a hearthrug before a roaring blaze; but tonight he squirmed and
twisted, for at the pit of his stomach was a peculiar feeling that
resembled nothing more closely than an attempt upon the part of the
fragments of elephant meat reposing there to come out into the night
and search for their elephant; but Tarzan was adamant.  He gritted his
teeth and held them back.  He was not to be robbed of his meal after
waiting so long to obtain it.

He had succeeded in dozing when the roaring of a lion awoke him.  He
sat up to discover that it was broad daylight.  Tarzan rubbed his eyes.
Could it be that he had really slept? He did not feel particularly
refreshed as he should have after a good sleep.  A noise attracted his
attention, and he looked down to see a lion standing at the foot of the
tree gazing hungrily at him.  Tarzan made a face at the king of beasts,
whereat Numa, greatly to the ape-man's surprise, started to climb up
into the branches toward him.  Now, never before had Tarzan seen a lion
climb a tree, yet, for some unaccountable reason, he was not greatly
surprised that this particular lion should do so.

As the lion climbed slowly toward him, Tarzan sought higher branches;
but to his chagrin, he discovered that it was with the utmost
difficulty that he could climb at all.  Again and again he slipped
back, losing all that he had gained, while the lion kept steadily at
his climbing, coming ever closer and closer to the ape-man. Tarzan
could see the hungry light in the yellow-green eyes.  He could see the
slaver on the drooping jowls, and the great fangs agape to seize and
destroy him.  Clawing desperately, the ape-man at last succeeded in
gaining a little upon his pursuer.  He reached the more slender
branches far aloft where he well knew no lion could follow; yet on and
on came devil-faced Numa.  It was incredible; but it was true.  Yet
what most amazed Tarzan was that though he realized the incredibility
of it all, he at the same time accepted it as a matter of course, first
that a lion should climb at all and second that he should enter the
upper terraces where even Sheeta, the panther, dared not venture.

To the very top of a tall tree the ape-man clawed his awkward way and
after him came Numa, the lion, moaning dismally.  At last Tarzan stood
balanced upon the very utmost pinnacle of a swaying branch, high above
the forest.  He could go no farther.  Below him the lion came steadily
upward, and Tarzan of the Apes realized that at last the end had come.
He could not do battle upon a tiny branch with Numa, the lion,
especially with such a Numa, to which swaying branches two hundred feet
above the ground provided as substantial footing as the ground itself.

Nearer and nearer came the lion.  Another moment and he could reach up
with one great paw and drag the ape-man downward to those awful jaws.
A whirring noise above his head caused Tarzan to glance apprehensively
upward.  A great bird was circling close above him.  He never had seen
so large a bird in all his life, yet he recognized it immediately, for
had he not seen it hundreds of times in one of the books in the little
cabin by the land-locked bay--the moss-grown cabin that with its
contents was the sole heritage left by his dead and unknown father to
the young Lord Greystoke?

In the picture-book the great bird was shown flying far above the
ground with a small child in its talons while, beneath, a distracted
mother stood with uplifted hands.  The lion was already reaching forth
a taloned paw to seize him when the bird swooped and buried no less
formidable talons in Tarzan's back.  The pain was numbing; but it was
with a sense of relief that the ape-man felt himself snatched from the
clutches of Numa.

With a great whirring of wings the bird rose rapidly until the forest
lay far below.  It made Tarzan sick and dizzy to look down upon it from
so great a height, so he closed his eyes tight and held his breath.
Higher and higher climbed the huge bird.  Tarzan opened his eyes.  The
jungle was so far away that he could see only a dim, green blur below
him, but just above and quite close was the sun.  Tarzan reached out
his hands and warmed them, for they were very cold.  Then a sudden
madness seized him.  Where was the bird taking him? Was he to submit
thus passively to a feathered creature however enormous? Was he, Tarzan
of the Apes, mighty fighter, to die without striking a blow in his own
defense? Never!

He snatched the hunting blade from his gee-string and thrusting upward
drove it once, twice, thrice into the breast above him.  The mighty
wings fluttered a few more times, spasmodically, the talons relaxed
their hold, and Tarzan of the Apes fell hurtling downward toward the
distant jungle.

It seemed to the ape-man that he fell for many minutes before he
crashed through the leafy verdure of the tree tops.  The smaller
branches broke his fall, so that he came to rest for an instant upon
the very branch upon which he had sought slumber the previous night.
For an instant he toppled there in a frantic attempt to regain his
equilibrium; but at last he rolled off, yet, clutching wildly, he
succeeded in grasping the branch and hanging on.

Once more he opened his eyes, which he had closed during the fall.
Again it was night.  With all his old agility he clambered back to the
crotch from which he had toppled.  Below him a lion roared, and,
looking downward, Tarzan could see the yellow-green eyes shining in the
moonlight as they bored hungrily upward through the darkness of the
jungle night toward him.

The ape-man gasped for breath.  Cold sweat stood out from every pore,
there was a great sickness at the pit of Tarzan's stomach.  Tarzan of
the Apes had dreamed his first dream.

For a long time he sat watching for Numa to climb into the tree after
him, and listening for the sound of the great wings from above, for to
Tarzan of the Apes his dream was a reality.

He could not believe what he had seen and yet, having seen even these
incredible things, he could not disbelieve the evidence of his own
perceptions.  Never in all his life had Tarzan's senses deceived him
badly, and so, naturally, he had great faith in them.  Each perception
which ever had been transmitted to Tarzan's brain had been, with
varying accuracy, a true perception.  He could not conceive of the
possibility of apparently having passed through such a weird adventure
in which there was no grain of truth.  That a stomach, disordered by
decayed elephant flesh, a lion roaring in the jungle, a picture-book,
and sleep could have so truly portrayed all the clear-cut details of
what he had seemingly experienced was quite beyond his knowledge; yet
he knew that Numa could not climb a tree, he knew that there existed in
the jungle no such bird as he had seen, and he knew, too, that he could
not have fallen a tiny fraction of the distance he had hurtled
downward, and lived.

To say the least, he was a very puzzled Tarzan as he tried to compose
himself once more for slumber--a very puzzled and a very nauseated
Tarzan.

As he thought deeply upon the strange occurrences of the night, he
witnessed another remarkable happening.  It was indeed quite
preposterous, yet he saw it all with his own eyes--it was nothing less
than Histah, the snake, wreathing his sinuous and slimy way up the bole
of the tree below him--Histah, with the head of the old man Tarzan had
shoved into the cooking pot--the head and the round, tight, black,
distended stomach.  As the old man's frightful face, with upturned
eyes, set and glassy, came close to Tarzan, the jaws opened to seize
him.  The ape-man struck furiously at the hideous face, and as he
struck the apparition disappeared.

Tarzan sat straight up upon his branch trembling in every limb,
wide-eyed and panting.  He looked all around him with his keen,
jungle-trained eyes, but he saw naught of the old man with the body of
Histah, the snake, but on his naked thigh the ape-man saw a
caterpillar, dropped from a branch above him.  With a grimace he
flicked it off into the darkness beneath.

And so the night wore on, dream following dream, nightmare following
nightmare, until the distracted ape-man started like a frightened deer
at the rustling of the wind in the trees about him, or leaped to his
feet as the uncanny laugh of a hyena burst suddenly upon a momentary
jungle silence.  But at last the tardy morning broke and a sick and
feverish Tarzan wound sluggishly through the dank and gloomy mazes of
the forest in search of water.  His whole body seemed on fire, a great
sickness surged upward to his throat.  He saw a tangle of almost
impenetrable thicket, and, like the wild beast he was, he crawled into
it to die alone and unseen, safe from the attacks of predatory
carnivora.

But he did not die.  For a long time he wanted to; but presently nature
and an outraged stomach relieved themselves in their own therapeutic
manner, the ape-man broke into a violent perspiration and then fell
into a normal and untroubled sleep which persisted well into the
afternoon.  When he awoke he found himself weak but no longer sick.

Once more he sought water, and after drinking deeply, took his way
slowly toward the cabin by the sea.  In times of loneliness and trouble
it had long been his custom to seek there the quiet and restfulness
which he could find nowhere else.

As he approached the cabin and raised the crude latch which his father
had fashioned so many years before, two small, blood-shot eyes watched
him from the concealing foliage of the jungle close by.  From beneath
shaggy, beetling brows they glared maliciously upon him, maliciously
and with a keen curiosity; then Tarzan entered the cabin and closed the
door after him.  Here, with all the world shut out from him, he could
dream without fear of interruption.  He could curl up and look at the
pictures in the strange things which were books, he could puzzle out
the printed word he had learned to read without knowledge of the spoken
language it represented, he could live in a wonderful world of which he
had no knowledge beyond the covers of his beloved books.  Numa and
Sabor might prowl about close to him, the elements might rage in all
their fury; but here at least, Tarzan might be entirely off his guard
in a delightful relaxation which gave him all his faculties for the
uninterrupted pursuit of this greatest of all his pleasures.

Today he turned to the picture of the huge bird which bore off the
little Tarmangani in its talons.  Tarzan puckered his brows as he
examined the colored print.  Yes, this was the very bird that had
carried him off the day before, for to Tarzan the dream had been so
great a reality that he still thought another day and a night had
passed since he had lain down in the tree to sleep.

But the more he thought upon the matter the less positive he was as to
the verity of the seeming adventure through which he had passed, yet
where the real had ceased and the unreal commenced he was quite unable
to determine.  Had he really then been to the village of the blacks at
all, had he killed the old Gomangani, had he eaten of the elephant
meat, had he been sick? Tarzan scratched his tousled black head and
wondered.  It was all very strange, yet he knew that he never had seen
Numa climb a tree, or Histah with the head and belly of an old black
man whom Tarzan already had slain.

Finally, with a sigh he gave up trying to fathom the unfathomable, yet
in his heart of hearts he knew that something had come into his life
that he never before had experienced, another life which existed when
he slept and the consciousness of which was carried over into his
waking hours.

Then he commenced to wonder if some of these strange creatures which he
met in his sleep might not slay him, for at such times Tarzan of the
Apes seemed to be a different Tarzan, sluggish, helpless and
timid--wishing to flee his enemies as fled Bara, the deer, most fearful
of creatures.

Thus, with a dream, came the first faint tinge of a knowledge of fear,
a knowledge which Tarzan, awake, had never experienced, and perhaps he
was experiencing what his early forbears passed through and transmitted
to posterity in the form of superstition first and religion later; for
they, as Tarzan, had seen things at night which they could not explain
by the daylight standards of sense perception or of reason, and so had
built for themselves a weird explanation which included grotesque
shapes, possessed of strange and uncanny powers, to whom they finally
came to attribute all those inexplicable phenomena of nature which with
each recurrence filled them with awe, with wonder, or with terror.

And as Tarzan concentrated his mind on the little bugs upon the printed
page before him, the active recollection of the strange adventures
presently merged into the text of that which he was reading--a story of
Bolgani, the gorilla, in captivity.  There was a more or less lifelike
illustration of Bolgani in colors and in a cage, with many remarkable
looking Tarmangani standing against a rail and peering curiously at the
snarling brute.  Tarzan wondered not a little, as he always did, at the
odd and seemingly useless array of colored plumage which covered the
bodies of the Tarmangani.  It always caused him to grin a trifle when
he looked at these strange creatures.  He wondered if they so covered
their bodies from shame of their hairlessness or because they thought
the odd things they wore added any to the beauty of their appearance.
Particularly was Tarzan amused by the grotesque headdresses of the
pictured people.  He wondered how some of the shes succeeded in
balancing theirs in an upright position, and he came as near to
laughing aloud as he ever had, as he contemplated the funny little
round things upon the heads of the hes.

Slowly the ape-man picked out the meaning of the various combinations
of letters on the printed page, and as he read, the little bugs, for as
such he always thought of the letters, commenced to run about in a most
confusing manner, blurring his vision and befuddling his thoughts.
Twice he brushed the back of a hand smartly across his eyes; but only
for a moment could he bring the bugs back to coherent and intelligible
form.  He had slept ill the night before and now he was exhausted from
loss of sleep, from sickness, and from the slight fever he had had, so
that it became more and more difficult to fix his attention, or to keep
his eyes open.

Tarzan realized that he was falling asleep, and just as the realization
was borne in upon him and he had decided to relinquish himself to an
inclination which had assumed almost the proportions of a physical
pain, he was aroused by the opening of the cabin door.  Turning quickly
toward the interruption Tarzan was amazed, for a moment, to see bulking
large in the doorway the huge and hairy form of Bolgani, the gorilla.

Now there was scarcely a denizen of the great jungle with whom Tarzan
would rather not have been cooped up inside the small cabin than
Bolgani, the gorilla, yet he felt no fear, even though his quick eye
noted that Bolgani was in the throes of that jungle madness which
seizes upon so many of the fiercer males.  Ordinarily the huge gorillas
avoid conflict, hide themselves from the other jungle folk, and are
generally the best of neighbors; but when they are attacked, or the
madness seizes them, there is no jungle denizen so bold and fierce as
to deliberately seek a quarrel with them.

But for Tarzan there was no escape.  Bolgani was glowering at him from
red-rimmed, wicked eyes.  In a moment he would rush in and seize the
ape-man. Tarzan reached for the hunting knife where he had lain it on
the table beside him; but as his fingers did not immediately locate the
weapon, he turned a quick glance in search of it.  As he did so his
eyes fell upon the book he had been looking at which still lay open at
the picture of Bolgani.  Tarzan found his knife, but he merely fingered
it idly and grinned in the direction of the advancing gorilla.

Not again would he be fooled by empty things which came while he slept!
In a moment, no doubt, Bolgani would turn into Pamba, the rat, with the
head of Tantor, the elephant.  Tarzan had seen enough of such strange
happenings recently to have some idea as to what he might expect; but
this time Bolgani did not alter his form as he came slowly toward the
young ape-man.

Tarzan was a bit puzzled, too, that he felt no desire to rush
frantically to some place of safety, as had been the sensation most
conspicuous in the other of his new and remarkable adventures.  He was
just himself now, ready to fight, if necessary; but still sure that no
flesh and blood gorilla stood before him.

The thing should be fading away into thin air by now, thought Tarzan,
or changing into something else; yet it did not.  Instead it loomed
clear-cut and real as Bolgani himself, the magnificent dark coat
glistening with life and health in a bar of sunlight which shot across
the cabin through the high window behind the young Lord Greystoke.
This was quite the most realistic of his sleep adventures, thought
Tarzan, as he passively awaited the next amusing incident.

And then the gorilla charged.  Two mighty, calloused hands seized upon
the ape-man, great fangs were bared close to his face, a hideous growl
burst from the cavernous throat and hot breath fanned Tarzan's cheek,
and still he sat grinning at the apparition.  Tarzan might be fooled
once or twice, but not for so many times in succession!  He knew that
this Bolgani was no real Bolgani, for had he been he never could have
gained entrance to the cabin, since only Tarzan knew how to operate the
latch.

The gorilla seemed puzzled by the strange passivity of the hairless
ape.  He paused an instant with his jaws snarling close to the other's
throat, then he seemed suddenly to come to some decision.  Whirling the
ape-man across a hairy shoulder, as easily as you or I might lift a
babe in arms, Bolgani turned and dashed out into the open, racing
toward the great trees.

Now, indeed, was Tarzan sure that this was a sleep adventure, and so
grinned largely as the giant gorilla bore him, unresisting, away.
Presently, reasoned Tarzan, he would awaken and find himself back in
the cabin where he had fallen asleep.  He glanced back at the thought
and saw the cabin door standing wide open.  This would never do! Always
had he been careful to close and latch it against wild intruders.
Manu, the monkey, would make sad havoc there among Tarzan's treasures
should he have access to the interior for even a few minutes.  The
question which arose in Tarzan's mind was a baffling one.  Where did
sleep adventures end and reality commence? How was he to be sure that
the cabin door was not really open?  Everything about him appeared
quite normal--there were none of the grotesque exaggerations of his
former sleep adventures.  It would be better then to be upon the safe
side and make sure that the cabin door was closed--it would do no harm
even if all that seemed to be happening were not happening at all.

Tarzan essayed to slip from Bolgani's shoulder; but the great beast
only growled ominously and gripped him tighter.  With a mighty effort
the ape-man wrenched himself loose, and as he slid to the ground, the
dream gorilla turned ferociously upon him, seized him once more and
buried great fangs in a sleek, brown shoulder.

The grin of derision faded from Tarzan's lips as the pain and the hot
blood aroused his fighting instincts.  Asleep or awake, this thing was
no longer a joke! Biting, tearing, and snarling, the two rolled over
upon the ground.  The gorilla now was frantic with insane rage.  Again
and again he loosed his hold upon the ape-man's shoulder in an attempt
to seize the jugular; but Tarzan of the Apes had fought before with
creatures who struck first for the vital vein, and each time he
wriggled out of harm's way as he strove to get his fingers upon his
adversary's throat.  At last he succeeded--his great muscles tensed and
knotted beneath his smooth hide as he forced with every ounce of his
mighty strength to push the hairy torso from him.  And as he choked
Bolgani and strained him away, his other hand crept slowly upward
between them until the point of the hunting knife rested over the
savage heart--there was a quick movement of the steel-thewed wrist and
the blade plunged to its goal.

Bolgani, the gorilla, voiced a single frightful shriek, tore himself
loose from the grasp of the ape-man, rose to his feet, staggered a few
steps and then plunged to earth.  There were a few spasmodic movements
of the limbs and the brute was still.

Tarzan of the Apes stood looking down upon his kill, and as he stood
there he ran his fingers through his thick, black shock of hair.
Presently he stooped and touched the dead body.  Some of the red
life-blood of the gorilla crimsoned his fingers.  He raised them to his
nose and sniffed.  Then he shook his head and turned toward the cabin.
The door was still open.  He closed it and fastened the latch.
Returning toward the body of his kill he again paused and scratched his
head.

If this was a sleep adventure, what then was reality? How was he to
know the one from the other? How much of all that had happened in his
life had been real and how much unreal?

He placed a foot upon the prostrate form and raising his face to the
heavens gave voice to the kill cry of the bull ape.  Far in the
distance a lion answered.  It was very real and, yet, he did not know.
Puzzled, he turned away into the jungle.

No, he did not know what was real and what was not; but there was one
thing that he did know--never again would he eat of the flesh of
Tantor, the elephant.




                          10

                 The Battle for Teeka

THE DAY WAS perfect.  A cool breeze tempered the heat of the equatorial
sun.  Peace had reigned within the tribe for weeks and no alien enemy
had trespassed upon its preserves from without.  To the ape-mind all
this was sufficient evidence that the future would be identical with
the immediate past--that Utopia would persist.

The sentinels, now from habit become a fixed tribal custom, either
relaxed their vigilance or entirely deserted their posts, as the whim
seized them.  The tribe was far scattered in search of food.  Thus may
peace and prosperity undermine the safety of the most primitive
community even as it does that of the most cultured.

Even the individuals became less watchful and alert, so that one might
have thought Numa and Sabor and Sheeta entirely deleted from the scheme
of things.  The shes and the balus roamed unguarded through the sullen
jungle, while the greedy males foraged far afield, and thus it was that
Teeka and Gazan, her balu, hunted upon the extreme southern edge of the
tribe with no great male near them.

Still farther south there moved through the forest a sinister figure--a
huge bull ape, maddened by solitude and defeat.  A week before he had
contended for the kingship of a tribe far distant, and now battered,
and still sore, he roamed the wilderness an outcast.  Later he might
return to his own tribe and submit to the will of the hairy brute he
had attempted to dethrone; but for the time being he dared not do so,
since he had sought not only the crown but the wives, as well, of his
lord and master.  It would require an entire moon at least to bring
forgetfulness to him he had wronged, and so Toog wandered a strange
jungle, grim, terrible, hate-filled.

It was in this mental state that Toog came unexpectedly upon a young
she feeding alone in the jungle--a stranger she, lithe and strong and
beautiful beyond compare.  Toog caught his breath and slunk quickly to
one side of the trail where the dense foliage of the tropical
underbrush concealed him from Teeka while permitting him to feast his
eyes upon her loveliness.

But not alone were they concerned with Teeka--they roved the
surrounding jungle in search of the bulls and cows and balus of her
tribe, though principally for the bulls.  When one covets a she of an
alien tribe one must take into consideration the great, fierce, hairy
guardians who seldom wander far from their wards and who will fight a
stranger to the death in protection of the mate or offspring of a
fellow, precisely as they would fight for their own.

Toog could see no sign of any ape other than the strange she and a
young balu playing near by.  His wicked, blood-shot eyes half closed as
they rested upon the charms of the former--as for the balu, one snap of
those great jaws upon the back of its little neck would prevent it from
raising any unnecessary alarm.

Toog was a fine, big male, resembling in many ways Teeka's mate, Taug.
Each was in his prime, and each was wonderfully muscled, perfectly
fanged and as horrifyingly ferocious as the most exacting and
particular she could wish.  Had Toog been of her own tribe, Teeka might
as readily have yielded to him as to Taug when her mating time arrived;
but now she was Taug's and no other male could claim her without first
defeating Taug in personal combat.  And even then Teeka retained some
rights in the matter.  If she did not favor a correspondent, she could
enter the lists with her rightful mate and do her part toward
discouraging his advances, a part, too, which would prove no mean
assistance to her lord and master, for Teeka, even though her fangs
were smaller than a male's, could use them to excellent effect.

Just now Teeka was occupied in a fascinating search for beetles, to the
exclusion of all else.  She did not realize how far she and Gazan had
become separated from the balance of the tribe, nor were her defensive
senses upon the alert as they should have been.  Months of immunity
from danger under the protecting watchfulness of the sentries, which
Tarzan had taught the tribe to post, had lulled them all into a sense
of peaceful security based on that fallacy which has wrecked many
enlightened communities in the past and will continue to wreck others
in the future--that because they have not been attacked they never will
be.

Toog, having satisfied himself that only the she and her balu were in
the immediate vicinity, crept stealthily forward.  Teeka's back was
toward him when he finally rushed upon her; but her senses were at last
awakened to the presence of danger and she wheeled to face the strange
bull just before he reached her.  Toog halted a few paces from her.
His anger had fled before the seductive feminine charms of the
stranger.  He made conciliatory noises--a species of clucking sound
with his broad, flat lips--that were, too, not greatly dissimilar to
that which might be produced in an osculatory solo.

But Teeka only bared her fangs and growled.  Little Gazan started to
run toward his mother, but she warned him away with a quick "Kreeg-ah!"
telling him to run high into a tall tree.  Evidently Teeka was not
favorably impressed by her new suitor.  Toog realized this and altered
his methods accordingly.  He swelled his giant chest, beat upon it with
his calloused knuckles and swaggered to and fro before her.

"I am Toog," he boasted.  "Look at my fighting fangs.  Look at my great
arms and my mighty legs.  With one bite I can slay your biggest bull.
Alone have I slain Sheeta.  I am Toog.  Toog wants you." Then he waited
for the effect, nor did he have long to wait.  Teeka turned with a
swiftness which belied her great weight and bolted in the opposite
direction.  Toog, with an angry growl, leaped in pursuit; but the
smaller, lighter female was too fleet for him.  He chased her for a few
yards and then, foaming and barking, he halted and beat upon the ground
with his hard fists.

From the tree above him little Gazan looked down and witnessed the
stranger bull's discomfiture.  Being young, and thinking himself safe
above the reach of the heavy male, Gazan screamed an ill-timed insult
at their tormentor.  Toog looked up.  Teeka had halted at a little
distance--she would not go far from her balu; that Toog quickly
realized and as quickly determined to take advantage of.  He saw that
the tree in which the young ape squatted was isolated and that Gazan
could not reach another without coming to earth.  He would obtain the
mother through her love for her young.

He swung himself into the lower branches of the tree.  Little Gazan
ceased to insult him; his expression of deviltry changed to one of
apprehension, which was quickly followed by fear as Toog commenced to
ascend toward him.  Teeka screamed to Gazan to climb higher, and the
little fellow scampered upward among the tiny branches which would not
support the weight of the great bull; but nevertheless Toog kept on
climbing.  Teeka was not fearful.  She knew that he could not ascend
far enough to reach Gazan, so she sat at a little distance from the
tree and applied jungle opprobrium to him.  Being a female, she was a
past master of the art.

But she did not know the malevolent cunning of Toog's little brain.
She took it for granted that the bull would climb as high as he could
toward Gazan and then, finding that he could not reach him, resume his
pursuit of her, which she knew would prove equally fruitless.  So sure
was she of the safety of her balu and her own ability to take care of
herself that she did not voice the cry for help which would soon have
brought the other members of the tribe flocking to her side.

Toog slowly reached the limit to which he dared risk his great weight
to the slender branches.  Gazan was still fifteen feet above him.  The
bull braced himself and seized the main branch in his powerful hands,
then he commenced shaking it vigorously.  Teeka was appalled.
Instantly she realized what the bull purposed.  Gazan clung far out
upon a swaying limb.  At the first shake he lost his balance, though he
did not quite fall, clinging still with his four hands; but Toog
redoubled his efforts; the shaking produced a violent snapping of the
limb to which the young ape clung.  Teeka saw all too plainly what the
outcome must be and forgetting her own danger in the depth of her
mother love, rushed forward to ascend the tree and give battle to the
fearsome creature that menaced the life of her little one.

But before ever she reached the bole, Toog had succeeded, by violent
shaking of the branch, to loosen Gazan's hold.  With a cry the little
fellow plunged down through the foliage, clutching futilely for a new
hold, and alighted with a sickening thud at his mother's feet, where he
lay silent and motionless.  Moaning, Teeka stooped to lift the still
form in her arms; but at the same instant Toog was upon her.

Struggling and biting she fought to free herself; but the giant muscles
of the great bull were too much for her lesser strength.  Toog struck
and choked her repeatedly until finally, half unconscious, she lapsed
into quasi submission.  Then the bull lifted her to his shoulder and
turned back to the trail toward the south from whence he had come.

Upon the ground lay the quiet form of little Gazan.  He did not moan.
He did not move.  The sun rose slowly toward meridian.  A mangy thing,
lifting its nose to scent the jungle breeze, crept through the
underbrush.  It was Dango, the hyena.  Presently its ugly muzzle broke
through some near-by foliage and its cruel eyes fastened upon Gazan.

Early that morning, Tarzan of the Apes had gone to the cabin by the
sea, where he passed many an hour at such times as the tribe was
ranging in the vicinity.  On the floor lay the skeleton of a man--all
that remained of the former Lord Greystoke--lay as it had fallen some
twenty years before when Kerchak, the great ape, had thrown it,
lifeless, there.  Long since had the termites and the small rodents
picked clean the sturdy English bones.  For years Tarzan had seen it
lying there, giving it no more attention than he gave the countless
thousand bones that strewed his jungle haunts.  On the bed another,
smaller, skeleton reposed and the youth ignored it as he ignored the
other.  How could he know that the one had been his father, the other
his mother? The little pile of bones in the rude cradle, fashioned with
such loving care by the former Lord Greystoke, meant nothing to
him--that one day that little skull was to help prove his right to a
proud title was as far beyond his ken as the satellites of the suns of
Orion.  To Tarzan they were bones--just bones.  He did not need them,
for there was no meat left upon them, and they were not in his way, for
he knew no necessity for a bed, and the skeleton upon the floor he
easily could step over.

Today he was restless.  He turned the pages first of one book and then
of another.  He glanced at pictures which he knew by heart, and tossed
the books aside.  He rummaged for the thousandth time in the cupboard.
He took out a bag which contained several small, round pieces of metal.
He had played with them many times in the years gone by; but always he
replaced them carefully in the bag, and the bag in the cupboard, upon
the very shelf where first he had discovered it.  In strange ways did
heredity manifest itself in the ape-man. Come of an orderly race, he
himself was orderly without knowing why.  The apes dropped things
wherever their interest in them waned--in the tall grass or from the
high-flung branches of the trees.  What they dropped they sometimes
found again, by accident; but not so the ways of Tarzan.  For his few
belongings he had a place and scrupulously he returned each thing to
its proper place when he was done with it.  The round pieces of metal
in the little bag always interested him.  Raised pictures were upon
either side, the meaning of which he did not quite understand.  The
pieces were bright and shiny.  It amused him to arrange them in various
figures upon the table.  Hundreds of times had he played thus.  Today,
while so engaged, he dropped a lovely yellow piece--an English
sovereign--which rolled beneath the bed where lay all that was mortal
of the once beautiful Lady Alice.

True to form, Tarzan at once dropped to his hands and knees and
searched beneath the bed for the lost gold piece.  Strange as it might
appear, he had never before looked beneath the bed.  He found the gold
piece, and something else he found, too--a small wooden box with a
loose cover.  Bringing them both out he returned the sovereign to its
bag and the bag to its shelf within the cupboard; then he investigated
the box.  It contained a quantity of cylindrical bits of metal,
cone-shaped at one end and flat at the other, with a projecting rim.
They were all quite green and dull, coated with years of verdigris.

Tarzan removed a handful of them from the box and examined them.  He
rubbed one upon another and discovered that the green came off, leaving
a shiny surface for two-thirds of their length and a dull gray over the
cone-shaped end.  Finding a bit of wood he rubbed one of the cylinders
rapidly and was rewarded by a lustrous sheen which pleased him.

At his side hung a pocket pouch taken from the body of one of the
numerous black warriors he had slain.  Into this pouch he put a handful
of the new playthings, thinking to polish them at his leisure; then he
replaced the box beneath the bed, and finding nothing more to amuse
him, left the cabin and started back in the direction of the tribe.

Shortly before he reached them he heard a great commotion ahead of
him--the loud screams of shes and balus, the savage, angry barking and
growling of the great bulls.  Instantly he increased his speed, for the
"Kreeg-ahs" that came to his ears warned him that something was amiss
with his fellows.

While Tarzan had been occupied with his own devices in the cabin of his
dead sire, Taug, Teeka's mighty mate, had been hunting a mile to the
north of the tribe.  At last, his belly filled, he had turned lazily
back toward the clearing where he had last seen the tribe and presently
commenced passing its members scattered alone or in twos or threes.
Nowhere did he see Teeka or Gazan, and soon he began inquiring of the
other apes where they might be; but none had seen them recently.

Now the lower orders are not highly imaginative.  They do not, as you
and I, paint vivid mental pictures of things which might have occurred,
and so Taug did not now apprehend that any misfortune had overtaken his
mate and their off-spring--he merely knew that he wished to find Teeka
that he might lie down in the shade and have her scratch his back while
his breakfast digested; but though he called to her and searched for
her and asked each whom he met, he could find no trace of Teeka, nor of
Gazan either.

He was beginning to become peeved and had about made up his mind to
chastise Teeka for wandering so far afield when he wanted her.  He was
moving south along a game trail, his calloused soles and knuckles
giving forth no sound, when he came upon Dango at the opposite side of
a small clearing.  The eater of carrion did not see Taug, for all his
eyes were for something which lay in the grass beneath a
tree--something upon which he was sneaking with the cautious stealth of
his breed.

Taug, always cautious himself, as it behooves one to be who fares up
and down the jungle and desires to survive, swung noiselessly into a
tree, where he could have a better view of the clearing.  He did not
fear Dango; but he wanted to see what it was that Dango stalked.  In a
way, possibly, he was actuated as much by curiosity as by caution.

And when Taug reached a place in the branches from which he could have
an unobstructed view of the clearing he saw Dango already sniffing at
something directly beneath him--something which Taug instantly
recognized as the lifeless form of his little Gazan.

With a cry so frightful, so bestial, that it momentarily paralyzed the
startled Dango, the great ape launched his mighty bulk upon the
surprised hyena.  With a cry and a snarl, Dango, crushed to earth,
turned to tear at his assailant; but as effectively might a sparrow
turn upon a hawk.  Taug's great, gnarled fingers closed upon the
hyena's throat and back, his jaws snapped once on the mangy neck,
crushing the vertebrae, and then he hurled the dead body contemptuously
aside.

Again he raised his voice in the call of the bull ape to its mate, but
there was no reply; then he leaned down to sniff at the body of Gazan.
In the breast of this savage, hideous beast there beat a heart which
was moved, however slightly, by the same emotions of paternal love
which affect us.  Even had we no actual evidence of this, we must know
it still, since only thus might be explained the survival of the human
race in which the jealousy and selfishness of the bulls would, in the
earliest stages of the race, have wiped out the young as rapidly as
they were brought into the world had not God implanted in the savage
bosom that paternal love which evidences itself most strongly in the
protective instinct of the male.

In Taug the protective instinct was not alone highly developed; but
affection for his offspring as well, for Taug was an unusually
intelligent specimen of these great, manlike apes which the natives of
the Gobi speak of in whispers; but which no white man ever had seen,
or, if seeing, lived to tell of until Tarzan of the Apes came among
them.

And so Taug felt sorrow as any other father might feel sorrow at the
loss of a little child.  To you little Gazan might have seemed a
hideous and repulsive creature, but to Taug and Teeka he was as
beautiful and as cute as is your little Mary or Johnnie or Elizabeth
Ann to you, and he was their firstborn, their only balu, and a
he--three things which might make a young ape the apple of any fond
father's eye.

For a moment Taug sniffed at the quiet little form.  With his muzzle
and his tongue he smoothed and caressed the rumpled coat.  From his
savage lips broke a low moan; but quickly upon the heels of sorrow came
the overmastering desire for revenge.

Leaping to his feet he screamed out a volley of "Kreegahs," punctuated
from time to time by the blood-freezing cry of an angry, challenging
bull--a rage-mad bull with the blood lust strong upon him.

Answering his cries came the cries of the tribe as they swung through
the trees toward him.  It was these that Tarzan heard on his return
from his cabin, and in reply to them he raised his own voice and
hurried forward with increased speed until he fairly flew through the
middle terraces of the forest.

When at last he came upon the tribe he saw their members gathered about
Taug and something which lay quietly upon the ground.  Dropping among
them, Tarzan approached the center of the group.  Taug was still
roaring out his challenges; but when he saw Tarzan he ceased and
stooping picked up Gazan in his arms and held him out for Tarzan to
see.  Of all the bulls of the tribe, Taug held affection for Tarzan
only.  Tarzan he trusted and looked up to as one wiser and more
cunning.  To Tarzan he came now--to the playmate of his balu days, the
companion of innumerable battles of his maturity.

When Tarzan saw the still form in Taug's arms, a low growl broke from
his lips, for he too loved Teeka's little balu.

"Who did it?" he asked.  "Where is Teeka?"

"I do not know," replied Taug.  "I found him lying here with Dango
about to feed upon him; but it was not Dango that did it--there are no
fang marks upon him."

Tarzan came closer and placed an ear against Gazan's breast.  "He is
not dead," he said.  "Maybe he will not die." He pressed through the
crowd of apes and circled once about them, examining the ground step by
step.  Suddenly he stopped and placing his nose close to the earth
sniffed.  Then he sprang to his feet, giving a peculiar cry.  Taug and
the others pressed forward, for the sound told them that the hunter had
found the spoor of his quarry.

"A stranger bull has been here," said Tarzan.  "It was he that hurt
Gazan.  He has carried off Teeka."

Taug and the other bulls commenced to roar and threaten; but they did
nothing.  Had the stranger bull been within sight they would have torn
him to pieces; but it did not occur to them to follow him.

"If the three bulls had been watching around the tribe this would not
have happened," said Tarzan.  "Such things will happen as long as you
do not keep the three bulls watching for an enemy.  The jungle is full
of enemies, and yet you let your shes and your balus feed where they
will, alone and unprotected.  Tarzan goes now--he goes to find Teeka
and bring her back to the tribe."

The idea appealed to the other bulls.  "We will all go," they cried.

"No," said Tarzan, "you will not all go.  We cannot take shes and balus
when we go out to hunt and fight.  You must remain to guard them or you
will lose them all."

They scratched their heads.  The wisdom of his advice was dawning upon
them, but at first they had been carried away by the new idea--the idea
of following up an enemy offender to wrest his prize from him and
punish him.  The community instinct was ingrained in their characters
through ages of custom.  They did not know why they had not thought to
pursue and punish the offender--they could not know that it was because
they had as yet not reached a mental plane which would permit them to
work as individuals.  In times of stress, the community instinct sent
them huddling into a compact herd where the great bulls, by the weight
of their combined strength and ferocity, could best protect them from
an enemy.  The idea of separating to do battle with a foe had not yet
occurred to them--it was too foreign to custom, too inimical to
community interests; but to Tarzan it was the first and most natural
thought.  His senses told him that there was but a single bull
connected with the attack upon Teeka and Gazan.  A single enemy did not
require the entire tribe for his punishment.  Two swift bulls could
quickly overhaul him and rescue Teeka.

In the past no one ever had thought to go forth in search of the shes
that were occasionally stolen from the tribe.  If Numa, Sabor, Sheeta
or a wandering bull ape from another tribe chanced to carry off a maid
or a matron while no one was looking, that was the end of it--she was
gone, that was all.  The bereaved husband, if the victim chanced to
have been mated, growled around for a day or two and then, if he were
strong enough, took another mate within the tribe, and if not, wandered
far into the jungle on the chance of stealing one from another
community.

In the past Tarzan of the Apes had condoned this practice for the
reason that he had had no interest in those who had been stolen; but
Teeka had been his first love and Teeka's balu held a place in his
heart such as a balu of his own would have held.  Just once before had
Tarzan wished to follow and revenge.  That had been years before when
Kulonga, the son of Mbonga, the chief, had slain Kala.  Then,
single-handed, Tarzan had pursued and avenged.  Now, though to a lesser
degree, he was moved by the same passion.

He turned toward Taug.  "Leave Gazan with Mumga," he said.  "She is old
and her fangs are broken and she is no good; but she can take care of
Gazan until we return with Teeka, and if Gazan is dead when we come
back," he turned to address Mumga, "I will kill you, too."

"Where are we going?" asked Taug.

"We are going to get Teeka," replied the ape-man, "and kill the bull
who has stolen her.  Come!"

He turned again to the spoor of the stranger bull, which showed plainly
to his trained senses, nor did he glance back to note if Taug followed.
The latter laid Gazan in Mumga's arms with a parting: "If he dies
Tarzan will kill you," and he followed after the brown-skinned figure
that already was moving at a slow trot along the jungle trail.

No other bull of the tribe of Kerchak was so good a trailer as Tarzan,
for his trained senses were aided by a high order of intelligence.  His
judgment told him the natural trail for a quarry to follow, so that he
need but note the most apparent marks upon the way, and today the trail
of Toog was as plain to him as type upon a printed page to you or me.

Following close behind the lithe figure of the ape-man came the huge
and shaggy bull ape.  No words passed between them.  They moved as
silently as two shadows among the myriad shadows of the forest.  Alert
as his eyes and ears, was Tarzan's patrician nose.  The spoor was
fresh, and now that they had passed from the range of the strong ape
odor of the tribe he had little difficulty in following Toog and Teeka
by scent alone.  Teeka's familiar scent spoor told both Tarzan and Taug
that they were upon her trail, and soon the scent of Toog became as
familiar as the other.

They were progressing rapidly when suddenly dense clouds overcast the
sun.  Tarzan accelerated his pace.  Now he fairly flew along the jungle
trail, or, where Toog had taken to the trees, followed nimbly as a
squirrel along the bending, undulating pathway of the foliage branches,
swinging from tree to tree as Toog had swung before them; but more
rapidly because they were not handicapped by a burden such as Toog's.

Tarzan felt that they must be almost upon the quarry, for the scent
spoor was becoming stronger and stronger, when the jungle was suddenly
shot by livid lightning, and a deafening roar of thunder reverberated
through the heavens and the forest until the earth trembled and shook.
Then came the rain--not as it comes to us of the temperate zones, but
as a mighty avalanche of water--a deluge which spills tons instead of
drops upon the bending forest giants and the terrified creatures which
haunt their shade.

And the rain did what Tarzan knew that it would do--it wiped the spoor
of the quarry from the face of the earth.  For a half hour the torrents
fell--then the sun burst forth, jeweling the forest with a million
scintillant gems; but today the ape-man, usually alert to the changing
wonders of the jungle, saw them not.  Only the fact that the spoor of
Teeka and her abductor was obliterated found lodgment in his thoughts.

Even among the branches of the trees there are well-worn trails, just
as there are trails upon the surface of the ground; but in the trees
they branch and cross more often, since the way is more open than among
the dense undergrowth at the surface.  Along one of these well-marked
trails Tarzan and Taug continued after the rain had ceased, because the
ape-man knew that this was the most logical path for the thief to
follow; but when they came to a fork, they were at a loss.  Here they
halted, while Tarzan examined every branch and leaf which might have
been touched by the fleeing ape.

He sniffed the bole of the tree, and with his keen eyes he sought to
find upon the bark some sign of the way the quarry had taken.  It was
slow work and all the time, Tarzan knew, the bull of the alien tribe
was forging steadily away from them--gaining precious minutes that
might carry him to safety before they could catch up with him.

First along one fork he went, and then another, applying every test
that his wonderful junglecraft was cognizant of; but again and again he
was baffled, for the scent had been washed away by the heavy downpour,
in every exposed place.  For a half hour Tarzan and Taug searched,
until at last, upon the bottom of a broad leaf, Tarzan's keen nose
caught the faint trace of the scent spoor of Toog, where the leaf had
brushed a hairy shoulder as the great ape passed through the foliage.

Once again the two took up the trail, but it was slow work now and
there were many discouraging delays when the spoor seemed lost beyond
recovery.  To you or me there would have been no spoor, even before the
coming of the rain, except, possibly, where Toog had come to earth and
followed a game trail.  In such places the imprint of a huge handlike
foot and the knuckles of one great hand were sometimes plain enough for
an ordinary mortal to read.  Tarzan knew from these and other
indications that the ape was yet carrying Teeka.  The depth of the
imprint of his feet indicated a much greater weight than that of any of
the larger bulls, for they were made under the combined weight of Toog
and Teeka, while the fact that the knuckles of but one hand touched the
ground at any time showed that the other hand was occupied in some
other business--the business of holding the prisoner to a hairy
shoulder.  Tarzan could follow, in sheltered places, the changing of
the burden from one shoulder to another, as indicated by the deepening
of the foot imprint upon the side of the load, and the changing of the
knuckle imprints from one side of the trail to the other.

There were stretches along the surface paths where the ape had gone for
considerable distances entirely erect upon his hind feet--walking as a
man walks; but the same might have been true of any of the great
anthropoids of the same species, for, unlike the chimpanzee and the
gorilla, they walk without the aid of their hands quite as readily as
with.  It was such things, however, which helped to identify to Tarzan
and to Taug the appearance of the abductor, and with his individual
scent characteristic already indelibly impressed upon their memories,
they were in a far better position to know him when they came upon him,
even should he have disposed of Teeka before, than is a modern sleuth
with his photographs and Bertillon measurements, equipped to recognize
a fugitive from civilized justice.

But with all their high-strung and delicately attuned perceptive
faculties the two bulls of the tribe of Kerchak were often sore pressed
to follow the trail at all, and at best were so delayed that in the
afternoon of the second day, they still had not overhauled the
fugitive.  The scent was now strong, for it had been made since the
rain, and Tarzan knew that it would not be long before they came upon
the thief and his loot.  Above them, as they crept stealthily forward,
chattered Manu, the monkey, and his thousand fellows; squawked and
screamed the brazen-throated birds of plumage; buzzed and hummed the
countless insects amid the rustling of the forest leaves, and, as they
passed, a little gray-beard, squeaking and scolding upon a swaying
branch, looked down and saw them.  Instantly the scolding and squeaking
ceased, and off tore the long-tailed mite as though Sheeta, the
panther, had been endowed with wings and was in close pursuit of him.
To all appearances he was only a very much frightened little monkey,
fleeing for his life--there seemed nothing sinister about him.

And what of Teeka during all this time? Was she at last resigned to her
fate and accompanying her new mate in the proper humility of a loving
and tractable spouse?  A single glance at the pair would have answered
these questions to the utter satisfaction of the most captious.  She
was torn and bleeding from many wounds, inflicted by the sullen Toog in
his vain efforts to subdue her to his will, and Toog too was disfigured
and mutilated; but with stubborn ferocity, he still clung to his now
useless prize.

On through the jungle he forced his way in the direction of the
stamping ground of his tribe.  He hoped that his king would have
forgotten his treason; but if not he was still resigned to his
fate--any fate would be better than suffering longer the sole
companionship of this frightful she, and then, too, he wished to
exhibit his captive to his fellows.  Maybe he could wish her on the
king--it is possible that such a thought urged him on.

At last they came upon two bulls feeding in a parklike grove--a
beautiful grove dotted with huge boulders half embedded in the rich
loam--mute monuments, possibly, to a forgotten age when mighty glaciers
rolled their slow course where now a torrid sun beats down upon a
tropic jungle.

The two bulls looked up, baring long fighting fangs, as Toog appeared
in the distance.  The latter recognized the two as friends.  "It is
Toog," he growled.  "Toog has come back with a new she."

The apes waited his nearer approach.  Teeka turned a snarling, fanged
face toward them.  She was not pretty to look upon, yet through the
blood and hatred upon her countenance they realized that she was
beautiful, and they envied Toog--alas! they did not know Teeka.

As they squatted looking at one another there raced through the trees
toward them a long-tailed little monkey with gray whiskers.  He was a
very excited little monkey when he came to a halt upon the limb of a
tree directly overhead.  "Two strange bulls come," he cried.  "One is a
Mangani, the other a hideous ape without hair upon his body.  They
follow the spoor of Toog.  I saw them."

The four apes turned their eyes backward along the trail Toog had just
come; then they looked at one another for a minute.  "Come," said the
larger of Toog's two friends, "we will wait for the strangers in the
thick bushes beyond the clearing."

He turned and waddled away across the open place, the others following
him.  The little monkey danced about, all excitement.  His chief
diversion in life was to bring about bloody encounters between the
larger denizens of the forest, that he might sit in the safety of the
trees and witness the spectacles.  He was a glutton for gore, was this
little, whiskered, gray monkey, so long as it was the gore of others--a
typical fight fan was the graybeard.

The apes hid themselves in the shrubbery beside the trail along which
the two stranger bulls would pass.  Teeka trembled with excitement.
She had heard the words of Manu, and she knew that the hairless ape
must be Tarzan, while the other was, doubtless, Taug.  Never, in her
wildest hopes, had she expected succor of this sort.  Her one thought
had been to escape and find her way back to the tribe of Kerchak; but
even this had appeared to her practically impossible, so closely did
Toog watch her.

As Taug and Tarzan reached the grove where Toog had come upon his
friends, the ape scent became so strong that both knew the quarry was
but a short distance ahead.  And so they went even more cautiously, for
they wished to come upon the thief from behind if they could and charge
him before he was aware of their presence.  That a little
gray-whiskered monkey had forestalled them they did not know, nor that
three pairs of savage eyes were already watching their every move and
waiting for them to come within reach of itching paws and slavering
jowls.

On they came across the grove, and as they entered the path leading
into the dense jungle beyond, a sudden "Kreeg-ah!" shrilled out close
before them--a "Kreeg-ah" in the familiar voice of Teeka.  The small
brains of Toog and his companions had not been able to foresee that
Teeka might betray them, and now that she had, they went wild with
rage.  Toog struck the she a mighty blow that felled her, and then the
three rushed forth to do battle with Tarzan and Taug.  The little
monkey danced upon his perch and screamed with delight.

And indeed he might well be delighted, for it was a lovely fight.
There were no preliminaries, no formalities, no introductions--the five
bulls merely charged and clinched.  They rolled in the narrow trail and
into the thick verdure beside it.  They bit and clawed and scratched
and struck, and all the while they kept up the most frightful chorus of
growlings and barkings and roarings.  In five minutes they were torn
and bleeding, and the little graybeard leaped high, shrilling his
primitive bravos; but always his attitude was "thumbs down." He wanted
to see something killed.  He did not care whether it were friend or
foe.  It was blood he wanted--blood and death.

Taug had been set upon by Toog and another of the apes, while Tarzan
had the third--a huge brute with the strength of a buffalo.  Never
before had Tarzan's assailant beheld so strange a creature as this
slippery, hairless bull with which he battled.  Sweat and blood covered
Tarzan's sleek, brown hide.  Again and again he slipped from the
clutches of the great bull, and all the while he struggled to free his
hunting knife from the scabbard in which it had stuck.

At length he succeeded--a brown hand shot out and clutched a hairy
throat, another flew upward clutching the sharp blade.  Three swift,
powerful strokes and the bull relaxed with a groan, falling limp
beneath his antagonist.  Instantly Tarzan broke from the clutches of
the dying bull and sprang to Taug's assistance.  Toog saw him coming
and wheeled to meet him.  In the impact of the charge, Tarzan's knife
was wrenched from his hand and then Toog closed with him.  Now was the
battle even--two against two--while on the verge, Teeka, now recovered
from the blow that had felled her, slunk waiting for an opportunity to
aid.  She saw Tarzan's knife and picked it up.  She never had used it,
but knew how Tarzan used it.  Always had she been afraid of the thing
which dealt death to the mightiest of the jungle people with the ease
that Tantor's great tusks deal death to Tantor's enemies.

She saw Tarzan's pocket pouch torn from his side, and with the
curiosity of an ape, that even danger and excitement cannot entirely
dispel, she picked this up, too.

Now the bulls were standing--the clinches had been broken.  Blood
streamed down their sides--their faces were crimsoned with it.  Little
graybeard was so fascinated that at last he had even forgotten to
scream and dance; but sat rigid with delight in the enjoyment of the
spectacle.

Back across the grove Tarzan and Taug forced their adversaries.  Teeka
followed slowly.  She scarce knew what to do.  She was lame and sore
and exhausted from the frightful ordeal through which she had passed,
and she had the confidence of her sex in the prowess of her mate and
the other bull of her tribe--they would not need the help of a she in
their battle with these two strangers.

The roars and screams of the fighters reverberated through the jungle,
awakening the echoes in the distant hills.  From the throat of Tarzan's
antagonist had come a score of "Kreeg-ahs!" and now from behind came
the reply he had awaited.  Into the grove, barking and growling, came a
score of huge bull apes--the fighting men of Toog's tribe.

Teeka saw them first and screamed a warning to Tarzan and Taug.  Then
she fled past the fighters toward the opposite side of the clearing,
fear for a moment claiming her.  Nor can one censure her after the
frightful ordeal from which she was still suffering.

Down upon them came the great apes.  In a moment Tarzan and Taug would
be torn to shreds that would later form the PIECE DE RESISTANCE of the
savage orgy of a Dum-Dum.  Teeka turned to glance back.  She saw the
impending fate of her defenders and there sprung to life in her savage
bosom the spark of martyrdom, that some common forbear had transmitted
alike to Teeka, the wild ape, and the glorious women of a higher order
who have invited death for their men.  With a shrill scream she ran
toward the battlers who were rolling in a great mass at the foot of one
of the huge boulders which dotted the grove; but what could she do? The
knife she held she could not use to advantage because of her lesser
strength.  She had seen Tarzan throw missiles, and she had learned this
with many other things from her childhood playmate.  She sought for
something to throw and at last her fingers touched upon the hard
objects in the pouch that had been torn from the ape-man. Tearing the
receptacle open, she gathered a handful of shiny cylinders--heavy for
their size, they seemed to her, and good missiles.  With all her
strength she hurled them at the apes battling in front of the granite
boulder.

The result surprised Teeka quite as much as it did the apes.  There was
a loud explosion, which deafened the fighters, and a puff of acrid
smoke.  Never before had one there heard such a frightful noise.
Screaming with terror, the stranger bulls leaped to their feet and fled
back toward the stamping ground of their tribe, while Taug and Tarzan
slowly gathered themselves together and arose, lame and bleeding, to
their feet.  They, too, would have fled had they not seen Teeka
standing there before them, the knife and the pocket pouch in her hands.

"What was it?" asked Tarzan.

Teeka shook her head.  "I hurled these at the stranger bulls," and she
held forth another handful of the shiny metal cylinders with the dull
gray, cone-shaped ends.

Tarzan looked at them and scratched his head.

"What are they?" asked Taug.

"I do not know," said Tarzan.  "I found them."

The little monkey with the gray beard halted among the trees a mile
away and huddled, terrified, against a branch.  He did not know that
the dead father of Tarzan of the Apes, reaching back out of the past
across a span of twenty years, had saved his son's life.

Nor did Tarzan, Lord Greystoke, know it either.




                          11

                     A Jungle Joke

TIME SELDOM HUNG heavily upon Tarzan's hands.  Even where there is
sameness there cannot be monotony if most of the sameness consists in
dodging death first in one form and then in another; or in inflicting
death upon others.  There is a spice to such an existence; but even
this Tarzan of the Apes varied in activities of his own invention.

He was full grown now, with the grace of a Greek god and the thews of a
bull, and, by all the tenets of apedom, should have been sullen,
morose, and brooding; but he was not.  His spirits seemed not to age at
all--he was still a playful child, much to the discomfiture of his
fellow-apes. They could not understand him or his ways, for with
maturity they quickly forgot their youth and its pastimes.

Nor could Tarzan quite understand them.  It seemed strange to him that
a few moons since, he had roped Taug about an ankle and dragged him
screaming through the tall jungle grasses, and then rolled and tumbled
in good-natured mimic battle when the young ape had freed himself, and
that today when he had come up behind the same Taug and pulled him over
backward upon the turf, instead of the playful young ape, a great,
snarling beast had whirled and leaped for his throat.

Easily Tarzan eluded the charge and quickly Taug's anger vanished,
though it was not replaced with playfulness; yet the ape-man realized
that Taug was not amused nor was he amusing.  The big bull ape seemed
to have lost whatever sense of humor he once may have possessed.  With
a grunt of disappointment, young Lord Greystoke turned to other fields
of endeavor.  A strand of black hair fell across one eye.  He brushed
it aside with the palm of a hand and a toss of his head.  It suggested
something to do, so he sought his quiver which lay cached in the hollow
bole of a lightning-riven tree.  Removing the arrows he turned the
quiver upside down, emptying upon the ground the contents of its
bottom--his few treasures.  Among them was a flat bit of stone and a
shell which he had picked up from the beach near his father's cabin.

With great care he rubbed the edge of the shell back and forth upon the
flat stone until the soft edge was quite fine and sharp.  He worked
much as a barber does who hones a razor, and with every evidence of
similar practice; but his proficiency was the result of years of
painstaking effort.  Unaided he had worked out a method of his own for
putting an edge upon the shell--he even tested it with the ball of his
thumb--and when it met with his approval he grasped a wisp of hair
which fell across his eyes, grasped it between the thumb and first
finger of his left hand and sawed upon it with the sharpened shell
until it was severed.  All around his head he went until his black
shock was rudely bobbed with a ragged bang in front.  For the
appearance of it he cared nothing; but in the matter of safety and
comfort it meant everything.  A lock of hair falling in one's eyes at
the wrong moment might mean all the difference between life and death,
while straggly strands, hanging down one's back were most
uncomfortable, especially when wet with dew or rain or perspiration.

As Tarzan labored at his tonsorial task, his active mind was busy with
many things.  He recalled his recent battle with Bolgani, the gorilla,
the wounds of which were but just healed.  He pondered the strange
sleep adventures of his first dreams, and he smiled at the painful
outcome of his last practical joke upon the tribe, when, dressed in the
hide of Numa, the lion, he had come roaring upon them, only to be
leaped upon and almost killed by the great bulls whom he had taught how
to defend themselves from an attack of their ancient enemy.

His hair lopped off to his entire satisfaction, and seeing no
possibility of pleasure in the company of the tribe, Tarzan swung
leisurely into the trees and set off in the direction of his cabin; but
when part way there his attention was attracted by a strong scent spoor
coming from the north.  It was the scent of the Gomangani.

Curiosity, that best-developed, common heritage of man and ape, always
prompted Tarzan to investigate where the Gomangani were concerned.
There was that about them which aroused his imagination.  Possibly it
was because of the diversity of their activities and interests.  The
apes lived to eat and sleep and propagate.  The same was true of all
the other denizens of the jungle, save the Gomangani.

These black fellows danced and sang, scratched around in the earth from
which they had cleared the trees and underbrush; they watched things
grow, and when they had ripened, they cut them down and put them in
straw-thatched huts.  They made bows and spears and arrows, poison,
cooking pots, things of metal to wear around their arms and legs.  If
it hadn't been for their black faces, their hideously disfigured
features, and the fact that one of them had slain Kala, Tarzan might
have wished to be one of them.  At least he sometimes thought so, but
always at the thought there rose within him a strange revulsion of
feeling, which he could not interpret or understand--he simply knew
that he hated the Gomangani, and that he would rather be Histah, the
snake, than one of these.

But their ways were interesting, and Tarzan never tired of spying upon
them, and from them he learned much more than he realized, though
always his principal thought was of some new way in which he could
render their lives miserable.  The baiting of the blacks was Tarzan's
chief divertissement.

Tarzan realized now that the blacks were very near and that there were
many of them, so he went silently and with great caution.  Noiselessly
he moved through the lush grasses of the open spaces, and where the
forest was dense, swung from one swaying branch to another, or leaped
lightly over tangled masses of fallen trees where there was no way
through the lower terraces, and the ground was choked and impassable.

And so presently he came within sight of the black warriors of Mbonga,
the chief.  They were engaged in a pursuit with which Tarzan was more
or less familiar, having watched them at it upon other occasions.  They
were placing and baiting a trap for Numa, the lion.  In a cage upon
wheels they were tying a kid, so fastening it that when Numa seized the
unfortunate creature, the door of the cage would drop behind him,
making him a prisoner.

These things the blacks had learned in their old home, before they
escaped through the untracked jungle to their new village.  Formerly
they had dwelt in the Belgian Congo until the cruelties of their
heartless oppressors had driven them to seek the safety of unexplored
solitudes beyond the boundaries of Leopold's domain.

In their old life they often had trapped animals for the agents of
European dealers, and had learned from them certain tricks, such as
this one, which permitted them to capture even Numa without injuring
him, and to transport him in safety and with comparative ease to their
village.

No longer was there a white market for their savage wares; but there
was still a sufficient incentive for the taking of Numa--alive. First
was the necessity for ridding the jungle of man-eaters, and it was only
after depredations by these grim and terrible scourges that a lion hunt
was organized.  Secondarily was the excuse for an orgy of celebration
was the hunt successful, and the fact that such fetes were rendered
doubly pleasurable by the presence of a live creature that might be put
to death by torture.

Tarzan had witnessed these cruel rites in the past.  Being himself more
savage than the savage warriors of the Gomangani, he was not so shocked
by the cruelty of them as he should have been, yet they did shock him.
He could not understand the strange feeling of revulsion which
possessed him at such times.  He had no love for Numa, the lion, yet he
bristled with rage when the blacks inflicted upon his enemy such
indignities and cruelties as only the mind of the one creature molded
in the image of God can conceive.

Upon two occasions he had freed Numa from the trap before the blacks
had returned to discover the success or failure of their venture.  He
would do the same today--that he decided immediately he realized the
nature of their intentions.

Leaving the trap in the center of a broad elephant trail near the
drinking hole, the warriors turned back toward their village.  On the
morrow they would come again.  Tarzan looked after them, upon his lips
an unconscious sneer--the heritage of unguessed caste.  He saw them
file along the broad trail, beneath the overhanging verdure of leafy
branch and looped and festooned creepers, brushing ebon shoulders
against gorgeous blooms which inscrutable Nature has seen fit to lavish
most profusely farthest from the eye of man.

As Tarzan watched, through narrowed lids, the last of the warriors
disappear beyond a turn in the trail, his expression altered to the
urge of a newborn thought.  A slow, grim smile touched his lips.  He
looked down upon the frightened, bleating kid, advertising, in its fear
and its innocence, its presence and its helplessness.

Dropping to the ground, Tarzan approached the trap and entered.
Without disturbing the fiber cord, which was adjusted to drop the door
at the proper time, he loosened the living bait, tucked it under an arm
and stepped out of the cage.

With his hunting knife he quieted the frightened animal, severing its
jugular; then he dragged it, bleeding, along the trail down to the
drinking hole, the half smile persisting upon his ordinarily grave
face.  At the water's edge the ape-man stooped and with hunting knife
and quick strong fingers deftly removed the dead kid's viscera.
Scraping a hole in the mud, he buried these parts which he did not eat,
and swinging the body to his shoulder took to the trees.

For a short distance he pursued his way in the wake of the black
warriors, coming down presently to bury the meat of his kill where it
would be safe from the depredations of Dango, the hyena, or the other
meat-eating beasts and birds of the jungle.  He was hungry.  Had he
been all beast he would have eaten; but his man-mind could entertain
urges even more potent than those of the belly, and now he was
concerned with an idea which kept a smile upon his lips and his eyes
sparkling in anticipation.  An idea, it was, which permitted him to
forget that he was hungry.

The meat safely cached, Tarzan trotted along the elephant trail after
the Gomangani.  Two or three miles from the cage he overtook them and
then he swung into the trees and followed above and behind
them--waiting his chance.

Among the blacks was Rabba Kega, the witch-doctor. Tarzan hated them
all; but Rabba Kega he especially hated.  As the blacks filed along the
winding path, Rabba Kega, being lazy, dropped behind.  This Tarzan
noted, and it filled him with satisfaction--his being radiated a grim
and terrible content.  Like an angel of death he hovered above the
unsuspecting black.

Rabba Kega, knowing that the village was but a short distance ahead,
sat down to rest.  Rest well, O Rabba Kega! It is thy last opportunity.

Tarzan crept stealthily among the branches of the tree above the
well-fed, self-satisfied witch-doctor.  He made no noise that the dull
ears of man could hear above the soughing of the gentle jungle breeze
among the undulating foliage of the upper terraces, and when he came
close above the black man he halted, well concealed by leafy branch and
heavy creeper.

Rabba Kega sat with his back against the bole of a tree, facing Tarzan.
The position was not such as the waiting beast of prey desired, and so,
with the infinite patience of the wild hunter, the ape-man crouched
motionless and silent as a graven image until the fruit should be ripe
for the plucking.  A poisonous insect buzzed angrily out of space.  It
loitered, circling, close to Tarzan's face.  The ape-man saw and
recognized it.  The virus of its sting spelled death for lesser things
than he--for him it would mean days of anguish.  He did not move.  His
glittering eyes remained fixed upon Rabba Kega after acknowledging the
presence of the winged torture by a single glance.  He heard and
followed the movements of the insect with his keen ears, and then he
felt it alight upon his forehead.  No muscle twitched, for the muscles
of such as he are the servants of the brain.  Down across his face
crept the horrid thing--over nose and lips and chin.  Upon his throat
it paused, and turning, retraced its steps.  Tarzan watched Rabba Kega.
Now not even his eyes moved.  So motionless he crouched that only death
might counterpart his movelessness.  The insect crawled upward over the
nut-brown cheek and stopped with its antennae brushing the lashes of
his lower lid.  You or I would have started back, closing our eyes and
striking at the thing; but you and I are the slaves, not the masters of
our nerves.  Had the thing crawled upon the eyeball of the ape-man, it
is believable that he could yet have remained wide-eyed and rigid; but
it did not.  For a moment it loitered there close to the lower lid,
then it rose and buzzed away.

Down toward Rabba Kega it buzzed and the black man heard it, saw it,
struck at it, and was stung upon the cheek before he killed it.  Then
he rose with a howl of pain and anger, and as he turned up the trail
toward the village of Mbonga, the chief, his broad, black back was
exposed to the silent thing waiting above him.

And as Rabba Kega turned, a lithe figure shot outward and downward from
the tree above upon his broad shoulders.  The impact of the springing
creature carried Rabba Kega to the ground.  He felt strong jaws close
upon his neck, and when he tried to scream, steel fingers throttled his
throat.  The powerful black warrior struggled to free himself; but he
was as a child in the grip of his adversary.

Presently Tarzan released his grip upon the other's throat; but each
time that Rabba Kega essayed a scream, the cruel fingers choked him
painfully.  At last the warrior desisted.  Then Tarzan half rose and
kneeled upon his victim's back, and when Rabba Kega struggled to arise,
the ape-man pushed his face down into the dirt of the trail.  With a
bit of the rope that had secured the kid, Tarzan made Rabba Kega's
wrists secure behind his back, then he rose and jerked his prisoner to
his feet, faced him back along the trail and pushed him on ahead.

Not until he came to his feet did Rabba Kega obtain a square look at
his assailant.  When he saw that it was the white devil-god his heart
sank within him and his knees trembled; but as he walked along the
trail ahead of his captor and was neither injured nor molested his
spirits slowly rose, so that he took heart again.  Possibly the
devil-god did not intend to kill him after all.  Had he not had little
Tibo in his power for days without harming him, and had he not spared
Momaya, Tibo's mother, when he easily might have slain her?

And then they came upon the cage which Rabba Kega, with the other black
warriors of the village of Mbonga, the chief, had placed and baited for
Numa.  Rabba Kega saw that the bait was gone, though there was no lion
within the cage, nor was the door dropped.  He saw and he was filled
with wonder not unmixed with apprehension.  It entered his dull brain
that in some way this combination of circumstances had a connection
with his presence there as the prisoner of the white devil-god.

Nor was he wrong.  Tarzan pushed him roughly into the cage, and in
another moment Rabba Kega understood.  Cold sweat broke from every pore
of his body--he trembled as with ague--for the ape-man was binding him
securely in the very spot the kid had previously occupied.  The
witch-doctor pleaded, first for his life, and then for a death less
cruel; but he might as well have saved his pleas for Numa, since
already they were directed toward a wild beast who understood no word
of what he said.

But his constant jabbering not only annoyed Tarzan, who worked in
silence, but suggested that later the black might raise his voice in
cries for succor, so he stepped out of the cage, gathered a handful of
grass and a small stick and returning, jammed the grass into Rabba
Kega's mouth, laid the stick crosswise between his teeth and fastened
it there with the thong from Rabba Kega's loin cloth.  Now could the
witch-doctor but roll his eyes and sweat.  Thus Tarzan left him.

The ape-man went first to the spot where he had cached the body of the
kid.  Digging it up, he ascended into a tree and proceeded to satisfy
his hunger.  What remained he again buried; then he swung away through
the trees to the water hole, and going to the spot where fresh, cold
water bubbled from between two rocks, he drank deeply.  The other
beasts might wade in and drink stagnant water; but not Tarzan of the
Apes.  In such matters he was fastidious.  From his hands he washed
every trace of the repugnant scent of the Gomangani, and from his face
the blood of the kid.  Rising, he stretched himself not unlike some
huge, lazy cat, climbed into a near-by tree and fell asleep.

When he awoke it was dark, though a faint luminosity still tinged the
western heavens.  A lion moaned and coughed as it strode through the
jungle toward water.  It was approaching the drinking hole.  Tarzan
grinned sleepily, changed his position and fell asleep again.

When the blacks of Mbonga, the chief, reached their village they
discovered that Rabba Kega was not among them.  When several hours had
elapsed they decided that something had happened to him, and it was the
hope of the majority of the tribe that whatever had happened to him
might prove fatal.  They did not love the witch-doctor. Love and fear
seldom are playmates; but a warrior is a warrior, and so Mbonga
organized a searching party.  That his own grief was not unassuagable
might have been gathered from the fact that he remained at home and
went to sleep.  The young warriors whom he sent out remained steadfast
to their purpose for fully half an hour, when, unfortunately for Rabba
Kega--upon so slight a thing may the fate of a man rest--a honey bird
attracted the attention of the searchers and led them off for the
delicious store it previously had marked down for betrayal, and Rabba
Kega's doom was sealed.

When the searchers returned empty handed, Mbonga was wroth; but when he
saw the great store of honey they brought with them his rage subsided.
Already Tubuto, young, agile and evil-minded, with face hideously
painted, was practicing the black art upon a sick infant in the fond
hope of succeeding to the office and perquisites of Rabba Kega.
Tonight the women of the old witch-doctor would moan and howl.
Tomorrow he would be forgotten.  Such is life, such is fame, such is
power--in the center of the world's highest civilization, or in the
depths of the black, primeval jungle.  Always, everywhere, man is man,
nor has he altered greatly beneath his veneer since he scurried into a
hole between two rocks to escape the tyrannosaurus six million years
ago.

The morning following the disappearance of Rabba Kega, the warriors set
out with Mbonga, the chief, to examine the trap they had set for Numa.
Long before they reached the cage, they heard the roaring of a great
lion and guessed that they had made a successful bag, so it was with
shouts of joy that they approached the spot where they should find
their captive.

Yes! There he was, a great, magnificent specimen--a huge, black-maned
lion.  The warriors were frantic with delight.  They leaped into the
air and uttered savage cries--hoarse victory cries, and then they came
closer, and the cries died upon their lips, and their eyes went wide so
that the whites showed all around their irises, and their pendulous
lower lips drooped with their drooping jaws.  They drew back in terror
at the sight within the cage--the mauled and mutilated corpse of what
had, yesterday, been Rabba Kega, the witch-doctor.

The captured lion had been too angry and frightened to feed upon the
body of his kill; but he had vented upon it much of his rage, until it
was a frightful thing to behold.

From his perch in a near-by tree Tarzan of the Apes, Lord Greystoke,
looked down upon the black warriors and grinned.  Once again his
self-pride in his ability as a practical joker asserted itself.  It had
lain dormant for some time following the painful mauling he had
received that time he leaped among the apes of Kerchak clothed in the
skin of Numa; but this joke was a decided success.

After a few moments of terror, the blacks came closer to the cage, rage
taking the place of fear--rage and curiosity.  How had Rabba Kega
happened to be in the cage? Where was the kid? There was no sign nor
remnant of the original bait.  They looked closely and they saw, to
their horror, that the corpse of their erstwhile fellow was bound with
the very cord with which they had secured the kid.  Who could have done
this thing? They looked at one another.

Tubuto was the first to speak.  He had come hopefully out with the
expedition that morning.  Somewhere he might find evidence of the death
of Rabba Kega.  Now he had found it, and he was the first to find an
explanation.

"The white devil-god," he whispered.  "It is the work of the white
devil-god!"

No one contradicted Tubuto, for, indeed, who else could it have been
but the great, hairless ape they all so feared? And so their hatred of
Tarzan increased again with an increased fear of him.  And Tarzan sat
in his tree and hugged himself.

No one there felt sorrow because of the death of Rabba Kega; but each
of the blacks experienced a personal fear of the ingenious mind which
might discover for any of them a death equally horrible to that which
the witch-doctor had suffered.  It was a subdued and thoughtful company
which dragged the captive lion along the broad elephant path back to
the village of Mbonga, the chief.

And it was with a sigh of relief that they finally rolled it into the
village and closed the gates behind them.  Each had experienced the
sensation of being spied upon from the moment they left the spot where
the trap had been set, though none had seen or heard aught to give
tangible food to his fears.

At the sight of the body within the cage with the lion, the women and
children of the village set up a most frightful lamentation, working
themselves into a joyous hysteria which far transcended the happy
misery derived by their more civilized prototypes who make a business
of dividing their time between the movies and the neighborhood funerals
of friends and strangers--especially strangers.

From a tree overhanging the palisade, Tarzan watched all that passed
within the village.  He saw the frenzied women tantalizing the great
lion with sticks and stones.  The cruelty of the blacks toward a
captive always induced in Tarzan a feeling of angry contempt for the
Gomangani.  Had he attempted to analyze this feeling he would have
found it difficult, for during all his life he had been accustomed to
sights of suffering and cruelty.  He, himself, was cruel.  All the
beasts of the jungle were cruel; but the cruelty of the blacks was of a
different order.  It was the cruelty of wanton torture of the helpless,
while the cruelty of Tarzan and the other beasts was the cruelty of
necessity or of passion.

Perhaps, had he known it, he might have credited this feeling of
repugnance at the sight of unnecessary suffering to heredity--to the
germ of British love of fair play which had been bequeathed to him by
his father and his mother; but, of course, he did not know, since he
still believed that his mother had been Kala, the great ape.

And just in proportion as his anger rose against the Gomangani his
savage sympathy went out to Numa, the lion, for, though Numa was his
lifetime enemy, there was neither bitterness nor contempt in Tarzan's
sentiments toward him.  In the ape-man's mind, therefore, the
determination formed to thwart the blacks and liberate the lion; but he
must accomplish this in some way which would cause the Gomangani the
greatest chagrin and discomfiture.

As he squatted there watching the proceeding beneath him, he saw the
warriors seize upon the cage once more and drag it between two huts.
Tarzan knew that it would remain there now until evening, and that the
blacks were planning a feast and orgy in celebration of their capture.
When he saw that two warriors were placed beside the cage, and that
these drove off the women and children and young men who would have
eventually tortured Numa to death, he knew that the lion would be safe
until he was needed for the evening's entertainment, when he would be
more cruelly and scientifically tortured for the edification of the
entire tribe.

Now Tarzan preferred to bait the blacks in as theatric a manner as his
fertile imagination could evolve.  He had some half-formed conception
of their superstitious fears and of their especial dread of night, and
so he decided to wait until darkness fell and the blacks partially
worked to hysteria by their dancing and religious rites before he took
any steps toward the freeing of Numa.  In the meantime, he hoped, an
idea adequate to the possibilities of the various factors at hand would
occur to him.  Nor was it long before one did.

He had swung off through the jungle to search for food when the plan
came to him.  At first it made him smile a little and then look
dubious, for he still retained a vivid memory of the dire results that
had followed the carrying out of a very wonderful idea along almost
identical lines, yet he did not abandon his intention, and a moment
later, food temporarily forgotten, he was swinging through the middle
terraces in rapid flight toward the stamping ground of the tribe of
Kerchak, the great ape.

As was his wont, he alighted in the midst of the little band without
announcing his approach save by a hideous scream just as he sprang from
a branch above them.  Fortunate are the apes of Kerchak that their kind
is not subject to heart failure, for the methods of Tarzan subjected
them to one severe shock after another, nor could they ever accustom
themselves to the ape-man's peculiar style of humor.

Now, when they saw who it was they merely snarled and grumbled angrily
for a moment and then resumed their feeding or their napping which he
had interrupted, and he, having had his little joke, made his way to
the hollow tree where he kept his treasures hid from the inquisitive
eyes and fingers of his fellows and the mischievous little manus.  Here
he withdrew a closely rolled hide--the hide of Numa with the head on; a
clever bit of primitive curing and mounting, which had once been the
property of the witch-doctor, Rabba Kega, until Tarzan had stolen it
from the village.

With this he made his way back through the jungle toward the village of
the blacks, stopping to hunt and feed upon the way, and, in the
afternoon, even napping for an hour, so that it was already dusk when
he entered the great tree which overhung the palisade and gave him a
view of the entire village.  He saw that Numa was still alive and that
the guards were even dozing beside the cage.  A lion is no great
novelty to a black man in the lion country, and the first keen edge of
their desire to worry the brute having worn off, the villagers paid
little or no attention to the great cat, preferring now to await the
grand event of the night.

Nor was it long after dark before the festivities commenced.  To the
beating of tom-toms, a lone warrior, crouched half doubled, leaped into
the firelight in the center of a great circle of other warriors, behind
whom stood or squatted the women and the children.  The dancer was
painted and armed for the hunt and his movements and gestures suggested
the search for the spoor of game.  Bending low, sometimes resting for a
moment on one knee, he searched the ground for signs of the quarry;
again he poised, statuesque, listening.  The warrior was young and
lithe and graceful; he was full-muscled and arrow-straight. The
firelight glistened upon his ebon body and brought out into bold relief
the grotesque designs painted upon his face, breasts, and abdomen.

Presently he bent low to the earth, then leaped high in air.  Every
line of face and body showed that he had struck the scent.  Immediately
he leaped toward the circle of warriors about him, telling them of his
find and summoning them to the hunt.  It was all in pantomime; but so
truly done that even Tarzan could follow it all to the least detail.

He saw the other warriors grasp their hunting spears and leap to their
feet to join in the graceful, stealthy "stalking dance." It was very
interesting; but Tarzan realized that if he was to carry his design to
a successful conclusion he must act quickly.  He had seen these dances
before and knew that after the stalk would come the game at bay and
then the kill, during which Numa would be surrounded by warriors, and
unapproachable.

With the lion's skin under one arm the ape-man dropped to the ground in
the dense shadows beneath the tree and then circled behind the huts
until he came out directly in the rear of the cage, in which Numa paced
nervously to and fro.  The cage was now unguarded, the two warriors
having left it to take their places among the other dancers.

Behind the cage Tarzan adjusted the lion's skin about him, just as he
had upon that memorable occasion when the apes of Kerchak, failing to
pierce his disguise, had all but slain him.  Then, on hands and knees,
he crept forward, emerged from between the two huts and stood a few
paces back of the dusky audience, whose whole attention was centered
upon the dancers before them.

Tarzan saw that the blacks had now worked themselves to a proper pitch
of nervous excitement to be ripe for the lion.  In a moment the ring of
spectators would break at a point nearest the caged lion and the victim
would be rolled into the center of the circle.  It was for this moment
that Tarzan waited.

At last it came.  A signal was given by Mbonga, the chief, at which the
women and children immediately in front of Tarzan rose and moved to one
side, leaving a broad path opening toward the caged lion.  At the same
instant Tarzan gave voice to the low, coughing roar of an angry lion
and slunk slowly forward through the open lane toward the frenzied
dancers.

A woman saw him first and screamed.  Instantly there was a panic in the
immediate vicinity of the ape-man. The strong light from the fire fell
full upon the lion head and the blacks leaped to the conclusion, as
Tarzan had known they would, that their captive had escaped his cage.

With another roar, Tarzan moved forward.  The dancing warriors paused
but an instant.  They had been hunting a lion securely housed within a
strong cage, and now that he was at liberty among them, an entirely
different aspect was placed upon the matter.  Their nerves were not
attuned to this emergency.  The women and children already had fled to
the questionable safety of the nearest huts, and the warriors were not
long in following their example, so that presently Tarzan was left in
sole possession of the village street.

But not for long.  Nor did he wish to be left thus long alone.  It
would not comport with his scheme.  Presently a head peered forth from
a near-by hut, and then another and another until a score or more of
warriors were looking out upon him, waiting for his next move--waiting
for the lion to charge or to attempt to escape from the village.

Their spears were ready in their hands against either a charge or a
bolt for freedom, and then the lion rose erect upon its hind legs, the
tawny skin dropped from it and there stood revealed before them in the
firelight the straight young figure of the white devil-god.

For an instant the blacks were too astonished to act.  They feared this
apparition fully as much as they did Numa, yet they would gladly have
slain the thing could they quickly enough have gathered together their
wits; but fear and superstition and a natural mental density held them
paralyzed while the ape-man stooped and gathered up the lion skin.
They saw him turn then and walk back into the shadows at the far end of
the village.  Not until then did they gain courage to pursue him, and
when they had come in force, with brandished spears and loud war cries,
the quarry was gone.

Not an instant did Tarzan pause in the tree.  Throwing the skin over a
branch he leaped again into the village upon the opposite side of the
great bole, and diving into the shadow of a hut, ran quickly to where
lay the caged lion.  Springing to the top of the cage he pulled upon
the cord which raised the door, and a moment later a great lion in the
prime of his strength and vigor leaped out into the village.

The warriors, returning from a futile search for Tarzan, saw him step
into the firelight.  Ah! there was the devil-god again, up to his old
trick.  Did he think he could twice fool the men of Mbonga, the chief,
the same way in so short a time? They would show him!  For long they
had waited for such an opportunity to rid themselves forever of this
fearsome jungle demon.  As one they rushed forward with raised spears.

The women and the children came from the huts to witness the slaying of
the devil-god. The lion turned blazing eyes upon them and then swung
about toward the advancing warriors.

With shouts of savage joy and triumph they came toward him, menacing
him with their spears.  The devil-god was theirs!

And then, with a frightful roar, Numa, the lion, charged.

The men of Mbonga, the chief, met Numa with ready spears and screams of
raillery.  In a solid mass of muscled ebony they waited the coming of
the devil-god; yet beneath their brave exteriors lurked a haunting fear
that all might not be quite well with them--that this strange creature
could yet prove invulnerable to their weapons and inflict upon them
full punishment for their effrontery.  The charging lion was all too
lifelike--they saw that in the brief instant of the charge; but beneath
the tawny hide they knew was hid the soft flesh of the white man, and
how could that withstand the assault of many war spears?

In their forefront stood a huge young warrior in the full arrogance of
his might and his youth.  Afraid? Not he! He laughed as Numa bore down
upon him; he laughed and couched his spear, setting the point for the
broad breast.  And then the lion was upon him.  A great paw swept away
the heavy war spear, splintering it as the hand of man might splinter a
dry twig.

Down went the black, his skull crushed by another blow.  And then the
lion was in the midst of the warriors, clawing and tearing to right and
left.  Not for long did they stand their ground; but a dozen men were
mauled before the others made good their escape from those frightful
talons and gleaming fangs.

In terror the villagers fled hither and thither.  No hut seemed a
sufficiently secure asylum with Numa ranging within the palisade.  From
one to another fled the frightened blacks, while in the center of the
village Numa stood glaring and growling above his kills.

At last a tribesman flung wide the gates of the village and sought
safety amid the branches of the forest trees beyond.  Like sheep his
fellows followed him, until the lion and his dead remained alone in the
village.

From the nearer trees the men of Mbonga saw the lion lower his great
head and seize one of his victims by the shoulder and then with slow
and stately tread move down the village street past the open gates and
on into the jungle.  They saw and shuddered, and from another tree
Tarzan of the Apes saw and smiled.

A full hour elapsed after the lion had disappeared with his feast
before the blacks ventured down from the trees and returned to their
village.  Wide eyes rolled from side to side, and naked flesh
contracted more to the chill of fear than to the chill of the jungle
night.

"It was he all the time," murmured one.  "It was the devil-god."

"He changed himself from a lion to a man, and back again into a lion,"
whispered another.

"And he dragged Mweeza into the forest and is eating him," said a
third, shuddering.

"We are no longer safe here," wailed a fourth.  "Let us take our
belongings and search for another village site far from the haunts of
the wicked devil-god."

But with morning came renewed courage, so that the experiences of the
preceding evening had little other effect than to increase their fear
of Tarzan and strengthen their belief in his supernatural origin.

And thus waxed the fame and the power of the ape-man in the mysterious
haunts of the savage jungle where he ranged, mightiest of beasts
because of the man-mind which directed his giant muscles and his
flawless courage.




                          12

                Tarzan Rescues the Moon

THE MOON SHONE down out of a cloudless sky--a huge, swollen moon that
seemed so close to earth that one might wonder that she did not brush
the crooning tree tops.  It was night, and Tarzan was abroad in the
jungle--Tarzan, the ape-man; mighty fighter, mighty hunter.  Why he
swung through the dark shadows of the somber forest he could not have
told you.  It was not that he was hungry--he had fed well this day, and
in a safe cache were the remains of his kill, ready against the coming
of a new appetite.  Perhaps it was the very joy of living that urged
him from his arboreal couch to pit his muscles and his senses against
the jungle night, and then, too, Tarzan always was goaded by an intense
desire to know.

The jungle which is presided over by Kudu, the sun, is a very different
jungle from that of Goro, the moon.  The diurnal jungle has its own
aspect--its own lights and shades, its own birds, its own blooms, its
own beasts; its noises are the noises of the day.  The lights and
shades of the nocturnal jungle are as different as one might imagine
the lights and shades of another world to differ from those of our
world; its beasts, its blooms, and its birds are not those of the
jungle of Kudu, the sun.

Because of these differences Tarzan loved to investigate the jungle by
night.  Not only was the life another life; but it was richer in
numbers and in romance; it was richer in dangers, too, and to Tarzan of
the Apes danger was the spice of life.  And the noises of the jungle
night--the roar of the lion, the scream of the leopard, the hideous
laughter of Dango, the hyena, were music to the ears of the ape-man.

The soft padding of unseen feet, the rustling of leaves and grasses to
the passage of fierce beasts, the sheen of opalesque eyes flaming
through the dark, the million sounds which proclaimed the teeming life
that one might hear and scent, though seldom see, constituted the
appeal of the nocturnal jungle to Tarzan.

Tonight he had swung a wide circle--toward the east first and then
toward the south, and now he was rounding back again into the north.
His eyes, his ears and his keen nostrils were ever on the alert.
Mingled with the sounds he knew, there were strange sounds--weird
sounds which he never heard until after Kudu had sought his lair below
the far edge of the big water--sounds which belonged to Goro, the
moon--and to the mysterious period of Goro's supremacy.  These sounds
often caused Tarzan profound speculation.  They baffled him because he
thought that he knew his jungle so well that there could be nothing
within it unfamiliar to him.  Sometimes he thought that as colors and
forms appeared to differ by night from their familiar daylight aspects,
so sounds altered with the passage of Kudu and the coming of Goro, and
these thoughts roused within his brain a vague conjecture that perhaps
Goro and Kudu influenced these changes.  And what more natural that
eventually he came to attribute to the sun and the moon personalities
as real as his own? The sun was a living creature and ruled the day.
The moon, endowed with brains and miraculous powers, ruled the night.

Thus functioned the untrained man-mind groping through the dark night
of ignorance for an explanation of the things he could not touch or
smell or hear and of the great, unknown powers of nature which he could
not see.

As Tarzan swung north again upon his wide circle the scent of the
Gomangani came to his nostrils, mixed with the acrid odor of wood
smoke.  The ape-man moved quickly in the direction from which the scent
was borne down to him upon the gentle night wind.  Presently the ruddy
sheen of a great fire filtered through the foliage to him ahead, and
when Tarzan came to a halt in the trees near it, he saw a party of half
a dozen black warriors huddled close to the blaze.  It was evidently a
hunting party from the village of Mbonga, the chief, caught out in the
jungle after dark.  In a rude circle about them they had constructed a
thorn boma which, with the aid of the fire, they apparently hoped would
discourage the advances of the larger carnivora.

That hope was not conviction was evidenced by the very palpable terror
in which they crouched, wide-eyed and trembling, for already Numa and
Sabor were moaning through the jungle toward them.  There were other
creatures, too, in the shadows beyond the firelight.  Tarzan could see
their yellow eyes flaming there.  The blacks saw them and shivered.
Then one arose and grasping a burning branch from the fire hurled it at
the eyes, which immediately disappeared.  The black sat down again.
Tarzan watched and saw that it was several minutes before the eyes
began to reappear in twos and fours.

Then came Numa, the lion, and Sabor, his mate.  The other eyes
scattered to right and left before the menacing growls of the great
cats, and then the huge orbs of the man-eaters flamed alone out of the
darkness.  Some of the blacks threw themselves upon their faces and
moaned; but he who before had hurled the burning branch now hurled
another straight at the faces of the hungry lions, and they, too,
disappeared as had the lesser lights before them.  Tarzan was much
interested.  He saw a new reason for the nightly fires maintained by
the blacks--a reason in addition to those connected with warmth and
light and cooking.  The beasts of the jungle feared fire, and so fire
was, in a measure, a protection from them.  Tarzan himself knew a
certain awe of fire.  Once he had, in investigating an abandoned fire
in the village of the blacks, picked up a live coal.  Since then he had
maintained a respectful distance from such fires as he had seen.  One
experience had sufficed.

For a few minutes after the black hurled the firebrand no eyes
appeared, though Tarzan could hear the soft padding of feet all about
him.  Then flashed once more the twin fire spots that marked the return
of the lord of the jungle and a moment later, upon a slightly lower
level, there appeared those of Sabor, his mate.

For some time they remained fixed and unwavering--a constellation of
fierce stars in the jungle night--then the male lion advanced slowly
toward the boma, where all but a single black still crouched in
trembling terror.  When this lone guardian saw that Numa was again
approaching, he threw another firebrand, and, as before, Numa retreated
and with him Sabor, the lioness; but not so far, this time, nor for so
long.  Almost instantly they turned and began circling the boma, their
eyes turning constantly toward the firelight, while low, throaty growls
evidenced their increasing displeasure.  Beyond the lions glowed the
flaming eyes of the lesser satellites, until the black jungle was shot
all around the black men's camp with little spots of fire.

Again and again the black warrior hurled his puny brands at the two big
cats; but Tarzan noticed that Numa paid little or no attention to them
after the first few retreats.  The ape-man knew by Numa's voice that
the lion was hungry and surmised that he had made up his mind to feed
upon a Gomangani; but would he dare a closer approach to the dreaded
flames?

Even as the thought was passing in Tarzan's mind, Numa stopped his
restless pacing and faced the boma.  For a moment he stood motionless,
except for the quick, nervous upcurving of his tail, then he walked
deliberately forward, while Sabor moved restlessly to and fro where he
had left her.  The black man called to his comrades that the lion was
coming, but they were too far gone in fear to do more than huddle
closer together and moan more loudly than before.

Seizing a blazing branch the man cast it straight into the face of the
lion.  There was an angry roar, followed by a swift charge.  With a
single bound the savage beast cleared the boma wall as, with almost
equal agility, the warrior cleared it upon the opposite side and,
chancing the dangers lurking in the darkness, bolted for the nearest
tree.

Numa was out of the boma almost as soon as he was inside it; but as he
went back over the low thorn wall, he took a screaming negro with him.
Dragging his victim along the ground he walked back toward Sabor, the
lioness, who joined him, and the two continued into the blackness,
their savage growls mingling with the piercing shrieks of the doomed
and terrified man.

At a little distance from the blaze the lions halted, there ensued a
short succession of unusually vicious growls and roars, during which
the cries and moans of the black man ceased--forever.

Presently Numa reappeared in the firelight.  He made a second trip into
the boma and the former grisly tragedy was reenacted with another
howling victim.

Tarzan rose and stretched lazily.  The entertainment was beginning to
bore him.  He yawned and turned upon his way toward the clearing where
the tribe would be sleeping in the encircling trees.

Yet even when he had found his familiar crotch and curled himself for
slumber, he felt no desire to sleep.  For a long time he lay awake
thinking and dreaming.  He looked up into the heavens and watched the
moon and the stars.  He wondered what they were and what power kept
them from falling.  His was an inquisitive mind.  Always he had been
full of questions concerning all that passed around him; but there
never had been one to answer his questions.  In childhood he had wanted
to KNOW, and, denied almost all knowledge, he still, in manhood, was
filled with the great, unsatisfied curiosity of a child.

He was never quite content merely to perceive that things happened--he
desired to know WHY they happened.  He wanted to know what made things
go.  The secret of life interested him immensely.  The miracle of death
he could not quite fathom.  Upon innumerable occasions he had
investigated the internal mechanism of his kills, and once or twice he
had opened the chest cavity of victims in time to see the heart still
pumping.

He had learned from experience that a knife thrust through this organ
brought immediate death nine times out of ten, while he might stab an
antagonist innumerable times in other places without even disabling
him.  And so he had come to think of the heart, or, as he called it,
"the red thing that breathes," as the seat and origin of life.

The brain and its functionings he did not comprehend at all.  That his
sense perceptions were transmitted to his brain and there translated,
classified, and labeled was something quite beyond him.  He thought
that his fingers knew when they touched something, that his eyes knew
when they saw, his ears when they heard, his nose when it scented.

He considered his throat, epidermis, and the hairs of his head as the
three principal seats of emotion.  When Kala had been slain a peculiar
choking sensation had possessed his throat; contact with Histah, the
snake, imparted an unpleasant sensation to the skin of his whole body;
while the approach of an enemy made the hairs on his scalp stand erect.

Imagine, if you can, a child filled with the wonders of nature,
bursting with queries and surrounded only by beasts of the jungle to
whom his questionings were as strange as Sanskrit would have been.  If
he asked Gunto what made it rain, the big old ape would but gaze at him
in dumb astonishment for an instant and then return to his interesting
and edifying search for fleas; and when he questioned Mumga, who was
very old and should have been very wise, but wasn't, as to the reason
for the closing of certain flowers after Kudu had deserted the sky, and
the opening of others during the night, he was surprised to discover
that Mumga had never noticed these interesting facts, though she could
tell to an inch just where the fattest grubworm should be hiding.

To Tarzan these things were wonders.  They appealed to his intellect
and to his imagination.  He saw the flowers close and open; he saw
certain blooms which turned their faces always toward the sun; he saw
leaves which moved when there was no breeze; he saw vines crawl like
living things up the boles and over the branches of great trees; and to
Tarzan of the Apes the flowers and the vines and the trees were living
creatures.  He often talked to them, as he talked to Goro, the moon,
and Kudu, the sun, and always was he disappointed that they did not
reply.  He asked them questions; but they could not answer, though he
knew that the whispering of the leaves was the language of the
leaves--they talked with one another.

The wind he attributed to the trees and grasses.  He thought that they
swayed themselves to and fro, creating the wind.  In no other way could
he account for this phenomenon.  The rain he finally attributed to the
stars, the moon, and the sun; but his hypothesis was entirely unlovely
and unpoetical.

Tonight as Tarzan lay thinking, there sprang to his fertile imagination
an explanation of the stars and the moon.  He became quite excited
about it.  Taug was sleeping in a nearby crotch.  Tarzan swung over
beside him.

"Taug!" he cried.  Instantly the great bull was awake and bristling,
sensing danger from the nocturnal summons.  "Look, Taug!" exclaimed
Tarzan, pointing toward the stars.  "See the eyes of Numa and Sabor, of
Sheeta and Dango.  They wait around Goro to leap in upon him for their
kill.  See the eyes and the nose and the mouth of Goro.  And the light
that shines upon his face is the light of the great fire he has built
to frighten away Numa and Sabor and Dango and Sheeta.

"All about him are the eyes, Taug, you can see them! But they do not
come very close to the fire--there are few eyes close to Goro.  They
fear the fire! It is the fire that saves Goro from Numa.  Do you see
them, Taug? Some night Numa will be very hungry and very angry--then he
will leap over the thorn bushes which encircle Goro and we will have no
more light after Kudu seeks his lair--the night will be black with the
blackness that comes when Goro is lazy and sleeps late into the night,
or when he wanders through the skies by day, forgetting the jungle and
its people."

Taug looked stupidly at the heavens and then at Tarzan.  A meteor fell,
blazing a flaming way through the sky.

"Look!" cried Tarzan.  "Goro has thrown a burning branch at Numa."

Taug grumbled.  "Numa is down below," he said.  "Numa does not hunt
above the trees." But he looked curiously and a little fearfully at the
bright stars above him, as though he saw them for the first time, and
doubtless it was the first time that Taug ever had seen the stars,
though they had been in the sky above him every night of his life.  To
Taug they were as the gorgeous jungle blooms--he could not eat them and
so he ignored them.

Taug fidgeted and was nervous.  For a long time he lay sleepless,
watching the stars--the flaming eyes of the beasts of prey surrounding
Goro, the moon--Goro, by whose light the apes danced to the beating of
their earthen drums.  If Goro should be eaten by Numa there could be no
more Dum-Dums. Taug was overwhelmed by the thought.  He glanced at
Tarzan half fearfully.  Why was his friend so different from the others
of the tribe? No one else whom Taug ever had known had had such queer
thoughts as Tarzan.  The ape scratched his head and wondered, dimly, if
Tarzan was a safe companion, and then he recalled slowly, and by a
laborious mental process, that Tarzan had served him better than any
other of the apes, even the strong and wise bulls of the tribe.

Tarzan it was who had freed him from the blacks at the very time that
Taug had thought Tarzan wanted Teeka.  It was Tarzan who had saved
Taug's little balu from death.  It was Tarzan who had conceived and
carried out the plan to pursue Teeka's abductor and rescue the stolen
one.  Tarzan had fought and bled in Taug's service so many times that
Taug, although only a brutal ape, had had impressed upon his mind a
fierce loyalty which nothing now could swerve--his friendship for
Tarzan had become a habit, a tradition almost, which would endure while
Taug endured.  He never showed any outward demonstration of
affection--he growled at Tarzan as he growled at the other bulls who
came too close while he was feeding--but he would have died for Tarzan.
He knew it and Tarzan knew it; but of such things apes do not
speak--their vocabulary, for the finer instincts, consisting more of
actions than words.  But now Taug was worried, and he fell asleep again
still thinking of the strange words of his fellow.

The following day he thought of them again, and without any intention
of disloyalty he mentioned to Gunto what Tarzan had suggested about the
eyes surrounding Goro, and the possibility that sooner or later Numa
would charge the moon and devour him.  To the apes all large things in
nature are male, and so Goro, being the largest creature in the heavens
by night, was, to them, a bull.

Gunto bit a sliver from a horny finger and recalled the fact that
Tarzan had once said that the trees talked to one another, and Gozan
recounted having seen the ape-man dancing alone in the moonlight with
Sheeta, the panther.  They did not know that Tarzan had roped the
savage beast and tied him to a tree before he came to earth and leaped
about before the rearing cat, to tantalize him.

Others told of seeing Tarzan ride upon the back of Tantor, the
elephant; of his bringing the black boy, Tibo, to the tribe, and of
mysterious things with which he communed in the strange lair by the
sea.  They had never understood his books, and after he had shown them
to one or two of the tribe and discovered that even the pictures
carried no impression to their brains, he had desisted.

"Tarzan is not an ape," said Gunto.  "He will bring Numa to eat us, as
he is bringing him to eat Goro.  We should kill him."

Immediately Taug bristled.  Kill Tarzan! "First you will kill Taug," he
said, and lumbered away to search for food.

But others joined the plotters.  They thought of many things which
Tarzan had done--things which apes did not do and could not understand.
Again Gunto voiced the opinion that the Tarmangani, the white ape,
should be slain, and the others, filled with terror about the stories
they had heard, and thinking Tarzan was planning to slay Goro, greeted
the proposal with growls of accord.

Among them was Teeka, listening with all her ears; but her voice was
not raised in furtherance of the plan.  Instead she bristled, showing
her fangs, and afterward she went away in search of Tarzan; but she
could not find him, as he was roaming far afield in search of meat.
She found Taug, though, and told him what the others were planning, and
the great bull stamped upon the ground and roared.  His bloodshot eyes
blazed with wrath, his upper lip curled up to expose his fighting
fangs, and the hair upon his spine stood erect, and then a rodent
scurried across the open and Taug sprang to seize it.  In an instant he
seemed to have forgotten his rage against the enemies of his friend;
but such is the mind of an ape.

Several miles away Tarzan of the Apes lolled upon the broad head of
Tantor, the elephant.  He scratched beneath the great ears with the
point of a sharp stick, and he talked to the huge pachyderm of
everything which filled his black-thatched head.  Little, or nothing,
of what he said did Tantor understand; but Tantor is a good listener.
Swaying from side to side he stood there enjoying the companionship of
his friend, the friend he loved, and absorbing the delicious sensations
of the scratching.

Numa, the lion, caught the scent of man, and warily stalked it until he
came within sight of his prey upon the head of the mighty tusker; then
he turned, growling and muttering, away in search of more propitious
hunting grounds.

The elephant caught the scent of the lion, borne to him by an eddying
breeze, and lifting his trunk trumpeted loudly.  Tarzan stretched back
luxuriously, lying supine at full length along the rough hide.  Flies
swarmed about his face; but with a leafy branch torn from a tree he
lazily brushed them away.

"Tantor," he said, "it is good to be alive.  It is good to lie in the
cool shadows.  It is good to look upon the green trees and the bright
colors of the flowers--upon everything which Bulamutumumo has put here
for us.  He is very good to us, Tantor; He has given you tender leaves
and bark, and rich grasses to eat; to me He has given Bara and Horta
and Pisah, the fruits and the nuts and the roots.  He provides for each
the food that each likes best.  All that He asks is that we be strong
enough or cunning enough to go forth and take it.  Yes, Tantor, it is
good to live.  I should hate to die."

Tantor made a little sound in his throat and curled his trunk upward
that he might caress the ape-man's cheek with the finger at its tip.

"Tantor," said Tarzan presently, "turn and feed in the direction of the
tribe of Kerchak, the great ape, that Tarzan may ride home upon your
head without walking."

The tusker turned and moved slowly off along a broad, tree-arched
trail, pausing occasionally to pluck a tender branch, or strip the
edible bark from an adjacent tree.  Tarzan sprawled face downward upon
the beast's head and back, his legs hanging on either side, his head
supported by his open palms, his elbows resting on the broad cranium.
And thus they made their leisurely way toward the gathering place of
the tribe.

Just before they arrived at the clearing from the north there reached
it from the south another figure--that of a well-knit black warrior,
who stepped cautiously through the jungle, every sense upon the alert
against the many dangers which might lurk anywhere along the way.  Yet
he passed beneath the southernmost sentry that was posted in a great
tree commanding the trail from the south.  The ape permitted the
Gomangani to pass unmolested, for he saw that he was alone; but the
moment that the warrior had entered the clearing a loud "Kreeg-ah!"
rang out from behind him, immediately followed by a chorus of replies
from different directions, as the great bulls crashed through the trees
in answer to the summons of their fellow.

The black man halted at the first cry and looked about him.  He could
see nothing, but he knew the voice of the hairy tree men whom he and
his kind feared, not alone because of the strength and ferocity of the
savage beings, but as well through a superstitious terror engendered by
the manlike appearance of the apes.

But Bulabantu was no coward.  He heard the apes all about him; he knew
that escape was probably impossible, so he stood his ground, his spear
ready in his hand and a war cry trembling on his lips.  He would sell
his life dearly, would Bulabantu, under-chief of the village of Mbonga,
the chief.

Tarzan and Tantor were but a short distance away when the first cry of
the sentry rang out through the quiet jungle.  Like a flash the ape-man
leaped from the elephant's back to a near-by tree and was swinging
rapidly in the direction of the clearing before the echoes of the first
"Kreeg-ah" had died away.  When he arrived he saw a dozen bulls
circling a single Gomangani.  With a blood-curdling scream Tarzan
sprang to the attack.  He hated the blacks even more than did the apes,
and here was an opportunity for a kill in the open.  What had the
Gomangani done? Had he slain one of the tribe?

Tarzan asked the nearest ape.  No, the Gomangani had harmed none.
Gozan, being on watch, had seen him coming through the forest and had
warned the tribe--that was all.  The ape-man pushed through the circle
of bulls, none of which as yet had worked himself into sufficient
frenzy for a charge, and came where he had a full and close view of the
black.  He recognized the man instantly.  Only the night before he had
seen him facing the eyes in the dark, while his fellows groveled in the
dirt at his feet, too terrified even to defend themselves.  Here was a
brave man, and Tarzan had deep admiration for bravery.  Even his hatred
of the blacks was not so strong a passion as his love of courage.  He
would have joyed in battling with a black warrior at almost any time;
but this one he did not wish to kill--he felt, vaguely, that the man
had earned his life by his brave defense of it on the preceding night,
nor did he fancy the odds that were pitted against the lone warrior.

He turned to the apes.  "Go back to your feeding," he said, "and let
this Gomangani go his way in peace.  He has not harmed us, and last
night I saw him fighting Numa and Sabor with fire, alone in the jungle.
He is brave.  Why should we kill one who is brave and who has not
attacked us? Let him go."

The apes growled.  They were displeased.  "Kill the Gomangani!" cried
one.

"Yes," roared another, "kill the Gomangani and the Tarmangani as well."

"Kill the white ape!" screamed Gozan, "he is no ape at all; but a
Gomangani with his skin off."

"Kill Tarzan!" bellowed Gunto.  "Kill! Kill! Kill!"

The bulls were now indeed working themselves into the frenzy of
slaughter; but against Tarzan rather than the black man.  A shaggy form
charged through them, hurling those it came in contact with to one side
as a strong man might scatter children.  It was Taug--great, savage
Taug.

"Who says 'kill Tarzan'?" he demanded.  "Who kills Tarzan must kill
Taug, too.  Who can kill Taug? Taug will tear your insides from you and
feed them to Dango."

"We can kill you all," replied Gunto.  "There are many of us and few of
you," and he was right.  Tarzan knew that he was right.  Taug knew it;
but neither would admit such a possibility.  It is not the way of bull
apes.

"I am Tarzan," cried the ape-man. "I am Tarzan.  Mighty hunter; mighty
fighter.  In all the jungle none so great as Tarzan."

Then, one by one, the opposing bulls recounted their virtues and their
prowess.  And all the time the combatants came closer and closer to one
another.  Thus do the bulls work themselves to the proper pitch before
engaging in battle.

Gunto came, stiff-legged, close to Tarzan and sniffed at him, with
bared fangs.  Tarzan rumbled forth a low, menacing growl.  They might
repeat these tactics a dozen times; but sooner or later one bull would
close with another and then the whole hideous pack would be tearing and
rending at their prey.

Bulabantu, the black man, had stood wide-eyed in wonder from the moment
he had seen Tarzan approaching through the apes.  He had heard much of
this devil-god who ran with the hairy tree people; but never before had
he seen him in full daylight.  He knew him well enough from the
description of those who had seen him and from the glimpses he had had
of the marauder upon several occasions when the ape-man had entered the
village of Mbonga, the chief, by night, in the perpetration of one of
his numerous ghastly jokes.

Bulabantu could not, of course, understand anything which passed
between Tarzan and the apes; but he saw that the ape-man and one of the
larger bulls were in argument with the others.  He saw that these two
were standing with their back toward him and between him and the
balance of the tribe, and he guessed, though it seemed improbable, that
they might be defending him.  He knew that Tarzan had once spared the
life of Mbonga, the chief, and that he had succored Tibo, and Tibo's
mother, Momaya.  So it was not impossible that he would help Bulabantu;
but how he could accomplish it Bulabantu could not guess; nor as a
matter of fact could Tarzan, for the odds against him were too great.

Gunto and the others were slowly forcing Tarzan and Taug back toward
Bulabantu.  The ape-man thought of his words with Tantor just a short
time before: "Yes, Tantor, it is good to live.  I should hate to die."
And now he knew that he was about to die, for the temper of the great
bulls was mounting rapidly against him.  Always had many of them hated
him, and all were suspicious of him.  They knew he was different.
Tarzan knew it too; but he was glad that he was--he was a MAN; that he
had learned from his picture-books, and he was very proud of the
distinction.  Presently, though, he would be a dead man.

Gunto was preparing to charge.  Tarzan knew the signs.  He knew that
the balance of the bulls would charge with Gunto.  Then it would soon
be over.  Something moved among the verdure at the opposite side of the
clearing.  Tarzan saw it just as Gunto, with the terrifying cry of a
challenging ape, sprang forward.  Tarzan voiced a peculiar call and
then crouched to meet the assault.  Taug crouched, too, and Bulabantu,
assured now that these two were fighting upon his side, couched his
spear and sprang between them to receive the first charge of the enemy.

Simultaneously a huge bulk broke into the clearing from the jungle
behind the charging bulls.  The trumpeting of a mad tusker rose shrill
above the cries of the anthropoids, as Tantor, the elephant, dashed
swiftly across the clearing to the aid of his friend.

Gunto never closed upon the ape-man, nor did a fang enter flesh upon
either side.  The terrific reverberation of Tantor's challenge sent the
bulls scurrying to the trees, jabbering and scolding.  Taug raced off
with them.  Only Tarzan and Bulabantu remained.  The latter stood his
ground because he saw that the devil-god did not run, and because the
black had the courage to face a certain and horrible death beside one
who had quite evidently dared death for him.

But it was a surprised Gomangani who saw the mighty elephant come to a
sudden halt in front of the ape-man and caress him with his long,
sinuous trunk.

Tarzan turned toward the black man.  "Go!" he said in the language of
the apes, and pointed in the direction of the village of Mbonga.
Bulabantu understood the gesture, if not the word, nor did he lose time
in obeying.  Tarzan stood watching him until he had disappeared.  He
knew that the apes would not follow.  Then he said to the elephant:
"Pick me up!" and the tusker swung him lightly to his head.

"Tarzan goes to his lair by the big water," shouted the ape-man to the
apes in the trees.  "All of you are more foolish than Manu, except Taug
and Teeka.  Taug and Teeka may come to see Tarzan; but the others must
keep away.  Tarzan is done with the tribe of Kerchak."

He prodded Tantor with a calloused toe and the big beast swung off
across the clearing, the apes watching them until they were swallowed
up by the jungle.

Before the night fell Taug killed Gunto, picking a quarrel with him
over his attack upon Tarzan.

For a moon the tribe saw nothing of Tarzan of the Apes.  Many of them
probably never gave him a thought; but there were those who missed him
more than Tarzan imagined.  Taug and Teeka often wished that he was
back, and Taug determined a dozen times to go and visit Tarzan in his
seaside lair; but first one thing and then another interfered.

One night when Taug lay sleepless looking up at the starry heavens he
recalled the strange things that Tarzan once had suggested to him--that
the bright spots were the eyes of the meat-eaters waiting in the dark
of the jungle sky to leap upon Goro, the moon, and devour him.  The
more he thought about this matter the more perturbed he became.

And then a strange thing happened.  Even as Taug looked at Goro, he saw
a portion of one edge disappear, precisely as though something was
gnawing upon it.  Larger and larger became the hole in the side of
Goro.  With a scream, Taug leaped to his feet.  His frenzied
"Kreeg-ahs!" brought the terrified tribe screaming and chattering
toward him.

"Look!" cried Taug, pointing at the moon.  "Look! It is as Tarzan said.
Numa has sprung through the fires and is devouring Goro.  You called
Tarzan names and drove him from the tribe; now see how wise he was.
Let one of you who hated Tarzan go to Goro's aid.  See the eyes in the
dark jungle all about Goro.  He is in danger and none can help
him--none except Tarzan.  Soon Goro will be devoured by Numa and we
shall have no more light after Kudu seeks his lair.  How shall we dance
the Dum-Dum without the light of Goro?"

The apes trembled and whimpered.  Any manifestation of the powers of
nature always filled them with terror, for they could not understand.

"Go and bring Tarzan," cried one, and then they all took up the cry of
"Tarzan!" "Bring Tarzan!" "He will save Goro." But who was to travel
the dark jungle by night to fetch him?

"I will go," volunteered Taug, and an instant later he was off through
the Stygian gloom toward the little land-locked harbor by the sea.

And as the tribe waited they watched the slow devouring of the moon.
Already Numa had eaten out a great semicircular piece.  At that rate
Goro would be entirely gone before Kudu came again.  The apes trembled
at the thought of perpetual darkness by night.  They could not sleep.
Restlessly they moved here and there among the branches of trees,
watching Numa of the skies at his deadly feast, and listening for the
coming of Taug with Tarzan.

Goro was nearly gone when the apes heard the sounds of the approach
through the trees of the two they awaited, and presently Tarzan,
followed by Taug, swung into a nearby tree.

The ape-man wasted no time in idle words.  In his hand was his long bow
and at his back hung a quiver full of arrows, poisoned arrows that he
had stolen from the village of the blacks; just as he had stolen the
bow.  Up into a great tree he clambered, higher and higher until he
stood swaying upon a small limb which bent low beneath his weight.
Here he had a clear and unobstructed view of the heavens.  He saw Goro
and the inroads which the hungry Numa had made into his shining surface.

Raising his face to the moon, Tarzan shrilled forth his hideous
challenge.  Faintly and from afar came the roar of an answering lion.
The apes shivered.  Numa of the skies had answered Tarzan.

Then the ape-man fitted an arrow to his bow, and drawing the shaft far
back, aimed its point at the heart of Numa where he lay in the heavens
devouring Goro.  There was a loud twang as the released bolt shot into
the dark heavens.  Again and again did Tarzan of the Apes launch his
arrows at Numa, and all the while the apes of the tribe of Kerchak
huddled together in terror.

At last came a cry from Taug.  "Look! Look!" he screamed.  "Numa is
killed.  Tarzan has killed Numa.  See! Goro is emerging from the belly
of Numa," and, sure enough, the moon was gradually emerging from
whatever had devoured her, whether it was Numa, the lion, or the shadow
of the earth; but were you to try to convince an ape of the tribe of
Kerchak that it was aught but Numa who so nearly devoured Goro that
night, or that another than Tarzan preserved the brilliant god of their
savage and mysterious rites from a frightful death, you would have
difficulty--and a fight on your hands.

And so Tarzan of the Apes came back to the tribe of Kerchak, and in his
coming he took a long stride toward the kingship, which he ultimately
won, for now the apes looked up to him as a superior being.

In all the tribe there was but one who was at all skeptical about the
plausibility of Tarzan's remarkable rescue of Goro, and that one,
strange as it may seem, was Tarzan of the Apes.









End of Project Gutenberg's Jungle Tales of Tarzan, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUNGLE TALES OF TARZAN ***

***** This file should be named 106.txt or 106.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/106/

Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tarzan the Untamed, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tarzan the Untamed

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Posting Date: January 28, 2010 [EBook #1401]
Release Date: August, 1998
First Posted: November 6, 2001
[Last updated: July 29, 2012]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN THE UNTAMED ***




Produced by Judith Boss









Tarzan the Untamed


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs





CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I  Murder and Pillage
    II  The Lion's Cave
   III  In the German Lines
    IV  When the Lion Fed
     V  The Golden Locket
    VI  Vengeance and Mercy
   VII  When Blood Told
  VIII  Tarzan and the Great Apes
    IX  Dropped from the Sky
     X  In the Hands of Savages
    XI  Finding the Airplane
   XII  The Black Flier
  XIII  Usanga's Reward
   XIV  The Black Lion
    XV  Mysterious Footprints
   XVI  The Night Attack
  XVII  The Walled City
 XVIII  Among the Maniacs
   XIX  The Queen's Story
    XX  Came Tarzan
   XXI  In the Alcove
  XXII  Out of the Niche
 XXIII  The Flight from Xuja
  XXIV  The Tommies




Chapter I

Murder and Pillage


Hauptmann Fritz Schneider trudged wearily through the somber aisles
of the dark forest. Sweat rolled down his bullet head and stood
upon his heavy jowls and bull neck. His lieutenant marched beside
him while Underlieutenant von Goss brought up the rear, following
with a handful of askaris the tired and all but exhausted porters
whom the black soldiers, following the example of their white officer,
encouraged with the sharp points of bayonets and the metal-shod
butts of rifles.

There were no porters within reach of Hauptmann Schneider so he
vented his Prussian spleen upon the askaris nearest at hand, yet
with greater circumspection since these men bore loaded rifles--and
the three white men were alone with them in the heart of Africa.

Ahead of the hauptmann marched half his company, behind him the
other half--thus were the dangers of the savage jungle minimized
for the German captain. At the forefront of the column staggered
two naked savages fastened to each other by a neck chain. These
were the native guides impressed into the service of Kultur and upon
their poor, bruised bodies Kultur's brand was revealed in divers
cruel wounds and bruises.

Thus even in darkest Africa was the light of German civilization
commencing to reflect itself upon the undeserving natives just as
at the same period, the fall of 1914, it was shedding its glorious
effulgence upon benighted Belgium.

It is true that the guides had led the party astray; but this is
the way of most African guides. Nor did it matter that ignorance
rather than evil intent had been the cause of their failure. It
was enough for Hauptmann Fritz Schneider to know that he was lost
in the African wilderness and that he had at hand human beings less
powerful than he who could be made to suffer by torture. That he
did not kill them outright was partially due to a faint hope that
they might eventually prove the means of extricating him from his
difficulties and partially that so long as they lived they might
still be made to suffer.

The poor creatures, hoping that chance might lead them at last
upon the right trail, insisted that they knew the way and so led
on through a dismal forest along a winding game trail trodden deep
by the feet of countless generations of the savage denizens of the
jungle.

Here Tantor, the elephant, took his long way from dust wallow to
water. Here Buto, the rhinoceros, blundered blindly in his solitary
majesty, while by night the great cats paced silently upon their
padded feet beneath the dense canopy of overreaching trees toward
the broad plain beyond, where they found their best hunting.

It was at the edge of this plain which came suddenly and  unexpectedly
before the eyes of the guides that their sad hearts beat with
renewed hope. Here the hauptmann drew a deep sigh of relief, for
after days of hopeless wandering through almost impenetrable jungle
the broad vista of waving grasses dotted here and there with open
park like woods and in the far distance the winding line of green
shrubbery that denoted a river appeared to the European a veritable
heaven.

The Hun smiled in his relief, passed a cheery word with his  lieutenant,
and then scanned the broad plain with his field glasses. Back and
forth they swept across the rolling land until at last they came
to rest upon a point near the center of the landscape and close to
the green-fringed contours of the river.

"We are in luck," said Schneider to his companions. "Do you see
it?"

The lieutenant, who was also gazing through his own glasses,
finally brought them to rest upon the same spot that had held the
attention of his superior.

"Yes," he said, "an English farm. It must be Greystoke's, for there
is none other in this part of British East Africa. God is with us,
Herr Captain."

"We have come upon the English schweinhund long before he can have
learned that his country is at war with ours," replied Schneider.
"Let him be the first to feel the iron hand of Germany."

"Let us hope that he is at home," said the lieutenant, "that we
may take him with us when we report to Kraut at Nairobi.  It will
go well indeed with Herr Hauptmann Fritz Schneider if he brings in
the famous Tarzan of the Apes as a prisoner of war."

Schneider smiled and puffed out his chest. "You are right, my
friend," he said, "it will go well with both of us; but I shall
have to travel far to catch General Kraut before he reaches Mombasa.
These English pigs with their contemptible army will make good time
to the Indian Ocean."

It was in a better frame of mind that the small force set out across
the open country toward the trim and well-kept farm buildings of
John Clayton, Lord Greystoke; but disappointment was to be their
lot since neither Tarzan of the Apes nor his son was at home.

Lady Jane, ignorant of the fact that a state of war existed between
Great Britain and Germany, welcomed the officers most hospitably
and gave orders through her trusted Waziri to prepare a feast for
the black soldiers of the enemy.

Far to the east, Tarzan of the Apes was traveling rapidly from
Nairobi toward the farm. At Nairobi he had received news of the
World War that had already started, and, anticipating an immediate
invasion of British East Africa by the Germans, was hurrying homeward
to fetch his wife to a place of greater security. With him were a
score of his ebon warriors, but far too slow for the ape-man was
the progress of these trained and hardened woodsmen.

When necessity demanded, Tarzan of the Apes sloughed the thin
veneer of his civilization and with it the hampering apparel that
was its badge. In a moment the polished English gentleman reverted
to the naked ape man.

His mate was in danger. For the time, that single thought  dominated.
He did not think of her as Lady Jane Greystoke, but rather as the
she he had won by the might of his steel thews, and that he must
hold and protect by virtue of the same offensive armament.

It was no member of the House of Lords who swung swiftly and grimly
through the tangled forest or trod with untiring muscles the wide
stretches of open plain--it was a great he ape filled with a single
purpose that excluded all thoughts of fatigue or danger.

Little Manu, the monkey, scolding and chattering in the upper
terraces of the forest, saw him pass. Long had it been since he had
thus beheld the great Tarmangani naked and alone hurtling through
the jungle. Bearded and gray was Manu, the monkey, and to his dim
old eyes came the fire of recollection of those days when Tarzan
of the Apes had ruled supreme, Lord of the Jungle, over all the
myriad life that trod the matted vegetation between the boles of
the great trees, or flew or swung or climbed in the leafy fastness
upward to the very apex of the loftiest terraces.

And Numa, the lion, lying up for the day close beside last night's
successful kill, blinked his yellow-green eyes and twitched his
tawny tail as he caught the scent spoor of his ancient enemy.

Nor was Tarzan senseless to the presence of Numa or Manu or any of
the many jungle beasts he passed in his rapid flight towards the
west. No particle had his shallow probing of English society dulled
his marvelous sense faculties. His nose had picked out the presence
of Numa, the lion, even before the majestic king of beasts was
aware of his passing.

He had heard noisy little Manu, and even the soft rustling of the
parting shrubbery where Sheeta passed before either of these alert
animals sensed his presence.

But however keen the senses of the ape-man, however swift his
progress through the wild country of his adoption, however mighty
the muscles that bore him, he was still mortal.  Time and space
placed their inexorable limits upon him; nor was there another who
realized this truth more keenly than Tarzan. He chafed and fretted
that he could not travel with the swiftness of thought and that the
long tedious miles stretching far ahead of him must require hours
and hours of tireless effort upon his part before he would swing
at last from the final bough of the fringing forest into the open
plain and in sight of his goal.

Days it took, even though he lay up at night for but a few hours
and left to chance the finding of meat directly on his trail. If
Wappi, the antelope, or Horta, the boar, chanced in his way when
he was hungry, he ate, pausing but long enough to make the kill
and cut himself a steak.

Then at last the long journey drew to its close and he was passing
through the last stretch of heavy forest that bounded his estate
upon the east, and then this was traversed and he stood upon the
plain's edge looking out across his broad lands towards his home.

At the first glance his eyes narrowed and his muscles tensed.  Even
at that distance he could see that something was amiss.  A thin
spiral of smoke arose at the right of the bungalow where the barns
had stood, but there were no barns there now, and from the bungalow
chimney from which smoke should have arisen, there arose nothing.

Once again Tarzan of the Apes was speeding onward, this time even
more swiftly than before, for he was goaded now by a nameless fear,
more product of intuition than of reason.  Even as the beasts,
Tarzan of the Apes seemed to possess a sixth sense. Long before he
reached the bungalow, he had almost pictured the scene that finally
broke upon his view.

Silent and deserted was the vine-covered cottage. Smoldering embers
marked the site of his great barns. Gone were the thatched huts of
his sturdy retainers, empty the fields, the pastures, and corrals.
Here and there vultures rose and circled above the carcasses of
men and beasts.

It was with a feeling as nearly akin to terror as he ever had
experienced that the ape-man finally forced himself to enter his
home. The first sight that met his eyes set the red haze of hate
and bloodlust across his vision, for there, crucified against the
wall of the living-room, was Wasimbu, giant son of the faithful
Muviro and for over a year the personal bodyguard of Lady Jane.

The overturned and shattered furniture of the room, the brown pools
of dried blood upon the floor, and prints of bloody hands on walls
and woodwork evidenced something of the frightfulness of the battle
that had been waged within the narrow confines of the apartment.
Across the baby grand piano lay the corpse of another black warrior,
while before the door of Lady Jane's boudoir were the dead bodies
of three more of the faithful Greystoke servants.

The door of this room was closed. With drooping shoulders and dull
eyes Tarzan stood gazing dumbly at the insensate panel which hid
from him what horrid secret he dared not even guess.

Slowly, with leaden feet, he moved toward the door. Gropingly his
hand reached for the knob. Thus he stood for another long minute,
and then with a sudden gesture he straightened his giant frame,
threw back his mighty shoulders and, with fearless head held high,
swung back the door and stepped across the threshold into the
room which held for him the dearest memories and associations of
his life. No change of expression crossed his grim and stern-set
features as he strode across the room and stood beside the little
couch and the inanimate form which lay face downward upon it; the
still, silent thing that had pulsed with life and youth and love.

No tear dimmed the eye of the ape-man, but the God who made him alone
could know the thoughts that passed through that still half-savage
brain. For a long time he stood there just looking down upon the
dead body, charred beyond recognition, and then he stooped and lifted
it in his arms.  As he turned the body over and saw how horribly
death had been meted he plumbed, in that instant, the uttermost
depths of grief and horror and hatred.

Nor did he require the evidence of the broken German rifle in the
outer room, or the torn and blood-stained service cap upon the
floor, to tell him who had been the perpetrators of this horrid
and useless crime.

For a moment he had hoped against hope that the blackened corpse was
not that of his mate, but when his eyes discovered and recognized
the rings upon her fingers the last faint ray of hope forsook him.

In silence, in love, and in reverence he buried, in the little
rose garden that had been Jane Clayton's pride and love, the poor,
charred form and beside it the great black warriors who had given
their lives so futilely in their mistress' protection.

At one side of the house Tarzan found other newly made graves
and in these he sought final evidence of the identity of the real
perpetrators of the atrocities that had been committed there in
his absence.

Here he disinterred the bodies of a dozen German askaris and found
upon their uniforms the insignia of the company and regiment to
which they had belonged. This was enough for the ape-man. White
officers had commanded these men, nor would it be a difficult task
to discover who they were.

Returning to the rose garden, he stood among the Hun trampled
blooms and bushes above the grave of his dead--with bowed head he
stood there in a last mute farewell. As the sun sank slowly behind
the towering forests of the west, he turned slowly away upon the
still-distinct trail of Hauptmann Fritz Schneider and his blood-stained
company.

His was the suffering of the dumb brute--mute; but though voiceless
no less poignant. At first his vast sorrow numbed his other faculties
of thought--his brain was overwhelmed by the calamity to such an
extent that it reacted to but a single objective suggestion: She is
dead! She is dead! She is dead!  Again and again this phrase beat
monotonously upon his brain--a dull, throbbing pain, yet mechanically
his feet followed the trail of her slayer while, subconsciously,
his every sense was upon the alert for the ever-present perils of
the jungle.

Gradually the labor of his great grief brought forth another
emotion so real, so tangible, that it seemed a companion walking
at his side. It was Hate--and it brought to him a measure of solace
and of comfort, for it was a sublime hate that ennobled him as
it has ennobled countless thousands since--hatred for Germany and
Germans. It centered about the slayer of his mate, of course; but
it included everything German, animate or inanimate. As the thought
took firm hold upon him he paused and raising his face to Goro, the
moon, cursed with upraised hand the authors of the hideous crime
that had been perpetrated in that once peaceful bungalow behind
him; and he cursed their progenitors, their progeny, and all their
kind the while he took silent oath to war upon them relentlessly
until death overtook him.

There followed almost immediately a feeling of content, for, where
before his future at best seemed but a void, now it was filled
with possibilities the contemplation of which brought him, if not
happiness, at least a surcease of absolute grief, for before him
lay a great work that would occupy his time.

Stripped not only of all the outward symbols of civilization, Tarzan
had also reverted morally and mentally to the status of the savage
beast he had been reared. Never had his civilization been more than
a veneer put on for the sake of her he loved because he thought it
made her happier to see him thus. In reality he had always held the
outward evidences of so-called culture in deep contempt. Civilization
meant to Tarzan of the Apes a curtailment of freedom in all its
aspects--freedom of action, freedom of thought, freedom of love,
freedom of hate. Clothes he abhorred--uncomfortable, hideous,
confining things that reminded him somehow of bonds securing him to
the life he had seen the poor creatures of London and Paris living.
Clothes were the emblems of that hypocrisy for which civilization
stood--a pretense that the wearers were ashamed of what the clothes
covered, of the human form made in the semblance of God. Tarzan
knew how silly and pathetic the lower orders of animals appeared in
the clothing of civilization, for he had seen several poor creatures
thus appareled in various traveling shows in Europe, and he knew,
too, how silly and pathetic man appears in them since the only men
he had seen in the first twenty years of his life had been, like
himself, naked savages. The ape-man had a keen admiration for a
well-muscled, well-proportioned body, whether lion, or antelope,
or man, and it had ever been beyond him to understand how clothes
could be considered more beautiful than a clear, firm, healthy
skin, or coat and trousers more graceful than the gentle curves of
rounded muscles playing beneath a flexible hide.

In civilization Tarzan had found greed and selfishness and cruelty
far beyond that which he had known in his familiar, savage jungle,
and though civilization had given him his mate and several friends
whom he loved and admired, he never had come to accept it as you
and I who have known little or nothing else; so it was with a sense
of relief that he now definitely abandoned it and all that it stood
for, and went forth into the jungle once again stripped to his loin
cloth and weapons.

The hunting knife of his father hung at his left hip, his bow and
his quiver of arrows were slung across his shoulders, while around
his chest over one shoulder and beneath the opposite arm was coiled
the long grass rope without which Tarzan would have felt quite as
naked as would you should you be suddenly thrust upon a busy highway
clad only in a union suit. A heavy war spear which he sometimes
carried in one hand and again slung by a thong about his neck so
that it hung down his back completed his armament and his apparel.
The diamond-studded locket with the pictures of his mother and
father that he had worn always until he had given it as a token
of his highest devotion to Jane Clayton before their marriage was
missing. She always had worn it since, but it had not been upon
her body when he found her slain in her boudoir, so that now his
quest for vengeance included also a quest for the stolen trinket.

Toward midnight Tarzan commenced to feel the physical strain of
his long hours of travel and to realize that even muscles such as
his had their limitations. His pursuit of the murderers had not
been characterized by excessive speed; but rather more in keeping
with his mental attitude, which was marked by a dogged determination
to require from the Germans more than an eye for an eye and more
than a tooth for a tooth, the element of time entering but slightly
into his calculations.

Inwardly as well as outwardly Tarzan had reverted to beast and in
the lives of beasts, time, as a measurable aspect of duration, has
no meaning. The beast is actively interested only in NOW, and as
it is always NOW and always shall be, there is an eternity of time
for the accomplishment of objects. The ape-man, naturally, had a
slightly more comprehensive realization of the limitations of time;
but, like the beasts, he moved with majestic deliberation when no
emergency prompted him to swift action.

Having dedicated his life to vengeance, vengeance became his natural
state and, therefore, no emergency, so he took his time in pursuit.
That he had not rested earlier was due to the fact that he had
felt no fatigue, his mind being occupied by thoughts of sorrow and
revenge; but now he realized that he was tired, and so he sought
a jungle giant that had harbored him upon more than a single other
jungle night.

Dark clouds moving swiftly across the heavens now and again eclipsed
the bright face of Goro, the moon, and forewarned the ape-man
of impending storm. In the depth of the jungle the cloud shadows
produced a thick blackness that might almost be felt--a blackness
that to you and me might have proven terrifying with its accompaniment
of rustling leaves and cracking twigs, and its even more suggestive
intervals of utter silence in which the crudest of imaginations
might have conjured crouching beasts of prey tensed for the fatal
charge; but through it Tarzan passed unconcerned, yet always alert.
Now he swung lightly to the lower terraces of the overarching
trees when some subtle sense warned him that Numa lay upon a kill
directly in his path, or again he sprang lightly to one side as
Buto, the rhinoceros, lumbered toward him along the narrow, deep-worn
trail, for the ape-man, ready to fight upon necessity's slightest
pretext, avoided unnecessary quarrels.

When he swung himself at last into the tree he sought, the moon was
obscured by a heavy cloud, and the tree tops were waving wildly in
a steadily increasing wind whose soughing drowned the lesser noises
of the jungle. Upward went Tarzan toward a sturdy crotch across which
he long since had laid and secured a little platform of branches.
It was very dark now, darker even than it had been before, for
almost the entire sky was overcast by thick, black clouds.

Presently the man-beast paused, his sensitive nostrils dilating as
he sniffed the air about him. Then, with the swiftness and agility of
a cat, he leaped far outward upon a swaying branch, sprang upward
through the darkness, caught another, swung himself upon it and
then to one still higher. What could have so suddenly transformed
his matter-of-fact ascent of the giant bole to the swift and wary
action of his detour among the branches? You or I could have seen
nothing--not even the little platform that an instant before had
been just above him and which now was immediately below--but as he
swung above it we should have heard an ominous growl; and then as
the moon was momentarily uncovered, we should have seen both the
platform, dimly, and a dark mass that lay stretched upon it--a dark
mass that presently, as our eyes became accustomed to the lesser
darkness, would take the form of Sheeta, the panther.

In answer to the cat's growl, a low and equally ferocious growl
rumbled upward from the ape-man's deep chest--a growl of warning
that told the panther he was trespassing upon the other's lair; but
Sheeta was in no mood to be dispossessed. With upturned, snarling
face he glared at the brown-skinned Tarmangani above him. Very slowly
the ape-man moved inward along the branch until he was directly
above the panther. In the man's hand was the hunting knife of his
long-dead father--the weapon that had first given him his real
ascendancy over the beasts of the jungle; but he hoped not to be
forced to use it, knowing as he did that more jungle battles were
settled by hideous growling than by actual combat, the law of bluff
holding quite as good in the jungle as elsewhere--only in matters
of love and food did the great beasts ordinarily close with fangs
and talons.

Tarzan braced himself against the bole of the tree and leaned closer
toward Sheeta.

"Stealer of balus!" he cried. The panther rose to a sitting position,
his bared fangs but a few feet from the ape-man's taunting face.
Tarzan growled hideously and struck at the cat's face with his
knife.  "I am Tarzan of the Apes," he roared.  "This is Tarzan's
lair.  Go, or I will kill you."

Though he spoke in the language of the great apes of the jungle,
it is doubtful that Sheeta understood the words, though he knew
well enough that the hairless ape wished to frighten him from his
well-chosen station past which edible creatures might be expected
to wander sometime during the watches of the night.

Like lightning the cat reared and struck a vicious blow at his
tormentor with great, bared talons that might well have torn away
the ape-man's face had the blow landed; but it did not land--Tarzan
was even quicker than Sheeta.  As the panther came to all fours
again upon the little platform, Tarzan un-slung his heavy spear and
prodded at the snarling face, and as Sheeta warded off the blows,
the two continued their horrid duet of blood-curdling roars and
growls.

Goaded to frenzy the cat presently determined to come up after this
disturber of his peace; but when he essayed to leap to the branch
that held Tarzan he found the sharp spear point always in his
face, and each time as he dropped back he was prodded viciously in
some tender part; but at length, rage having conquered his better
judgment, he leaped up the rough bole to the very branch upon which
Tarzan stood.  Now the two faced each other upon even footing and
Sheeta saw a quick revenge and a supper all in one.  The hairless
ape-thing with the tiny fangs and the puny talons would be helpless
before him.

The heavy limb bent beneath the weight of the two beasts as Sheeta
crept cautiously out upon it and Tarzan backed slowly away, growling.
The wind had risen to the proportions of a gale so that even the
greatest giants of the forest swayed, groaning, to its force and
the branch upon which the two faced each other rose and fell like
the deck of a storm-tossed ship.  Goro was now entirely obscured,
but vivid flashes of lightning lit up the jungle at brief intervals,
revealing the grim tableau of primitive passion upon the swaying
limb.

Tarzan backed away, drawing Sheeta farther from the stem of the
tree and out upon the tapering branch, where his footing became
ever more precarious.  The cat, infuriated by the pain of spear
wounds, was overstepping the bounds of caution.  Already he had
reached a point where he could do little more than maintain a secure
footing, and it was this moment that Tarzan chose to charge.  With
a roar that mingled with the booming thunder from above he leaped
toward the panther, who could only claw futilely with one huge paw
while he clung to the branch with the other; but the ape-man did
not come within that parabola of destruction.  Instead he leaped
above menacing claws and snapping fangs, turning in mid-air  and
alighting upon Sheeta's back, and at the instant of impact  his knife
struck deep into the tawny side. Then Sheeta, impelled by pain and
hate and rage and the first law of Nature,  went mad. Screaming
and clawing he attempted to turn upon the ape-thing clinging to
his back. For an instant he toppled upon the now wildly gyrating
limb, clutched frantically to save himself, and then plunged downward
into the darkness with Tarzan still clinging to him. Crashing
through splintering branches the two fell. Not for an instant did
the ape-man consider relinquishing his death-hold upon his adversary.
He had entered the lists in mortal combat and true to the primitive
instincts of the wild--the unwritten law of the jungle--one or both
must die before the battle ended.

Sheeta, catlike, alighted upon four out-sprawled feet, the  weight
of the ape-man crushing him to earth, the long knife  again imbedded
in his side. Once the panther struggled to rise; but only to sink
to earth again. Tarzan felt the giant muscles relax beneath him.
Sheeta was dead. Rising, the ape-man placed a foot upon the body of
his vanquished foe, raised his face toward the thundering heavens,
and as the lightning flashed and the torrential rain broke upon
him, screamed forth the wild victory cry of the bull ape.

Having accomplished his aim and driven the enemy from his lair,
Tarzan gathered an armful of large fronds and climbed to his dripping
couch. Laying a few of the fronds upon the poles he lay down and
covered himself against the rain with the others, and despite the
wailing of the wind and the crashing of the thunder, immediately
fell asleep.




Chapter II

The Lion's Cave


The rain lasted for twenty-four hours and much of the time it fell
in torrents so that when it ceased, the trail he had been following
was entirely obliterated. Cold and uncomfortable--it was a savage
Tarzan who threaded the mazes of the soggy jungle. Manu, the
monkey, shivering and chattering in the dank trees, scolded and fled
at his approach. Even the panthers and the lions let the growling
Tarmangani pass unmolested.

When the sun shone again upon the second day and a wide, open plain
let the full heat of Kudu flood the chilled, brown body, Tarzan's
spirits rose; but it was still a sullen, surly brute that moved
steadily onward into the south where he hoped again to pick up the
trail of the Germans. He was now in German East Africa and it was
his intention to skirt the mountains west of Kilimanjaro, whose
rugged peaks he was quite willing to give a wide berth, and then
swing eastward along the south side of the range to the railway that
led to Tanga, for his experience among men suggested that it was
toward this railroad that German troops would be likely to converge.

Two days later, from the southern slopes of Kilimanjaro, he heard
the boom of cannon far away to the east. The afternoon had been
dull and cloudy and now as he was passing through a narrow gorge a
few great drops of rain began to splatter upon his naked shoulders.
Tarzan shook his head and growled his disapproval; then he cast his
eyes about for shelter, for he had had quite enough of the cold and
drenching.  He wanted to hasten on in the direction of the booming
noise, for he knew that there would be Germans fighting against the
English. For an instant his bosom swelled with pride at the thought
that he was English and then he shook his head again viciously.
"No!" he muttered, "Tarzan of the Apes is not English, for the
English are men and Tarzan is Tarmangani;" but he could not hide
even from his sorrow or from his sullen hatred of mankind in general
that his heart warmed at the thought it was Englishmen who fought
the Germans.  His regret was that the English were human and not
great white apes as he again considered himself.

"Tomorrow," he thought, "I will travel that way and find the Germans,"
and then he set himself to the immediate task of discovering some
shelter from the storm. Presently he espied the low and narrow
entrance to what appeared to be a cave at the base of the cliffs
which formed the northern side of the gorge. With drawn knife he
approached the spot warily, for he knew that if it were a cave it
was doubtless the lair of some other beast. Before the entrance lay
many large fragments of rock of different sizes, similar to others
scattered along the entire base of the cliff, and it was in Tarzan's
mind that if he found the cave unoccupied he would barricade the
door and insure himself a quiet and peaceful night's repose within
the sheltered interior. Let the storm rage without--Tarzan would
remain within until it ceased, comfortable and dry. A tiny rivulet
of cold water trickled outward from the opening.

Close to the cave Tarzan kneeled and sniffed the ground.  A low
growl escaped him and his upper lip curved to expose his fighting
fangs. "Numa!" he muttered; but he did not stop. Numa might not be
at home--he would investigate.  The entrance was so low that the
ape-man was compelled to drop to all fours before he could poke
his head within the aperture; but first he looked, listened, and
sniffed in each direction at his rear--he would not be taken by
surprise from that quarter.

His first glance within the cave revealed a narrow tunnel with
daylight at its farther end. The interior of the tunnel was not so
dark but that the ape-man could readily see that it was untenanted
at present. Advancing cautiously he crawled toward the opposite
end imbued with a full realization of what it would mean if Numa
should suddenly enter the tunnel in front of him; but Numa did not
appear and the ape-man emerged at length into the open and stood
erect, finding himself in a rocky cleft whose precipitous walls
rose almost sheer on every hand, the tunnel from the gorge passing
through the cliff and forming a passageway from the outer world
into a large pocket or gulch entirely enclosed by steep walls of
rock. Except for the small passageway from the gorge, there was no
other entrance to the gulch which was some hundred feet in length
and about fifty in width and appeared to have been worn from the
rocky cliff by the falling of water during long ages. A tiny stream
from Kilimanjaro's eternal snow cap still trickled over the edge
of the rocky wall at the upper end of the gulch, forming a little
pool at the bottom of the cliff from which a small rivulet wound
downward to the tunnel through which it passed to the gorge beyond.
A single great tree flourished near the center of the gulch, while
tufts of wiry grass were scattered here and there among the rocks
of the gravelly floor.

The bones of many large animals lay about and among them were
several human skulls. Tarzan raised his eyebrows. "A man-eater,"
he murmured, "and from appearances he has held sway here for a long
time. Tonight Tarzan will take the lair of the man-eater and Numa
may roar and grumble upon the outside."

The ape-man had advanced well into the gulch as he investigated
his surroundings and now as he stood near the tree, satisfied that
the tunnel would prove a dry and quiet retreat for the night, he
turned to retrace his way to the outer end of the entrance that he
might block it with boulders against Numa's return, but even with
the thought there came something to his sensitive ears that froze
him into statuesque immobility with eyes glued upon the tunnel's
mouth. A moment later the head of a huge lion framed in a great
black mane appeared in the opening. The yellow-green eyes glared,
round and unblinking, straight at the trespassing Tarmangani, a low
growl rumbled from the deep chest, and lips curled back to expose
the mighty fangs.

"Brother of Dango!" shouted Tarzan, angered that Numa's return should
have been so timed as to frustrate his plans for a comfortable
night's repose. "I am Tarzan of the Apes, Lord of the Jungle.
Tonight I lair here--go!"

But Numa did not go. Instead he rumbled forth a menacing roar and
took a few steps in Tarzan's direction. The ape-man picked up a
rock and hurled it at the snarling face. One can never be sure of
a lion. This one might turn tail and run at the first intimation
of attack--Tarzan had bluffed many in his time--but not now. The
missile struck Numa full upon the snout--a tender part of a cat's
anatomy--and instead of causing him to flee it transformed him into
an infuriated engine of wrath and destruction.

Up went his tail, stiff and erect, and with a series of frightful
roars he bore down upon the Tarmangani at the speed of an express
train. Not an instant too soon did Tarzan reach the tree and swing
himself into its branches and there he squatted, hurling insults at
the king of beasts while Numa paced a circle beneath him, growling
and roaring in rage.

It was raining now in earnest adding to the ape-man's discomfort
and disappointment. He was very angry; but as only direct necessity
had ever led him to close in mortal combat with a lion, knowing
as he did that he had only luck and agility to pit against the
frightful odds of muscle, weight, fangs, and talons, he did not now
even consider descending and engaging in so unequal and useless a
duel for the mere reward of a little added creature comfort. And
so he sat perched in the tree while the rain fell steadily and the
lion padded round and round beneath, casting a baleful eye upward
after every few steps.

Tarzan scanned the precipitous walls for an avenue of escape. They
would have baffled an ordinary man; but the ape-man, accustomed
to climbing, saw several places where he might gain a foothold,
precarious possibly; but enough to give him reasonable assurance
of escape if Numa would but betake himself to the far end of the
gulch for a moment.  Numa, however, notwithstanding the rain, gave
no evidence of quitting his post so that at last Tarzan really
began to consider seriously if it might not be as well to take the
chance of a battle with him rather than remain longer cold and wet
and humiliated in the tree.

But even as he turned the matter over in his mind Numa turned
suddenly and walked majestically toward the tunnel without even a
backward glance. The instant that he disappeared, Tarzan dropped
lightly to the ground upon the far side of the tree and was away at
top speed for the cliff. The lion had no sooner entered the tunnel
than he backed immediately out again and, pivoting like a flash,
was off across the gulch in full charge after the flying ape-man;
but Tarzan's lead was too great--if he could find finger or foothold
upon the sheer wall he would be safe; but should he slip from the
wet rocks his doom was already sealed as he would fall directly into
Numa's clutches where even the Great Tarmangani would be helpless.

With the agility of a cat Tarzan ran up the cliff for thirty feet
before he paused, and there finding a secure foothold, he stopped
and looked down upon Numa who was leaping upward in a wild and
futile attempt to scale the rocky wall to his prey. Fifteen or
twenty feet from the ground the lion would scramble only to fall
backward again defeated. Tarzan eyed him for a moment and then
commenced a slow and cautious ascent toward the summit. Several
times he had difficulty in finding holds but at last he drew himself
over the edge, rose, picked up a bit of loose rock, hurled it at
Numa and strode away.

Finding an easy descent to the gorge, he was about to pursue his
journey in the direction of the still-booming guns when a sudden
thought caused him to halt and a half-smile to play about his lips.
Turning, he trotted quickly back to the outer opening of Numa's
tunnel. Close beside it he listened for a moment and then rapidly
began to gather large rocks and pile them within the entrance.
He had almost closed the aperture when the lion appeared upon the
inside--a very ferocious and angry lion that pawed and clawed at
the rocks and uttered mighty roars that caused the earth to tremble;
but roars did not frighten Tarzan of the Apes. At Kala's shaggy
breast he had closed his infant eyes in sleep upon countless nights
in years gone by to the savage chorus of similar roars. Scarcely a
day or night of his jungle life--and practically all his life had
been spent in the jungle--had he not heard the roaring of hungry
lions, or angry lions, or love-sick lions. Such sounds affected
Tarzan as the tooting of an automobile horn may affect you--if you
are in front of the automobile it warns you out of the way, if you
are not in front of it you scarcely notice it. Figuratively Tarzan
was not in front of the automobile--Numa could not reach him and
Tarzan knew it, so he continued deliberately to choke the entrance
until there was no possibility of Numa's getting out again. When
he was quite through he made a grimace at the hidden lion beyond
the barrier and resumed his way toward the east. "A man-eater who
will eat no more men," he soliloquized.

That night Tarzan lay up under an overhanging shelf of rock. The
next morning he resumed his journey, stopping only long enough to
make a kill and satisfy his hunger. The other beasts of the wild
eat and lie up; but Tarzan never let his belly interfere with his
plans. In this lay one of the greatest differences between the ape-man
and his fellows of the jungles and forests. The firing ahead rose
and fell during the day. He had noticed that it was highest at
dawn and immediately after dusk and that during the night it almost
ceased. In the middle of the afternoon of the second day he came
upon troops moving up toward the front. They appeared to be raiding
parties, for they drove goats and cows along with them and there
were native porters laden with grain and other foodstuffs. He saw
that these natives were all secured by neck chains and he also saw
that the troops were composed of native soldiers in German uniforms.
The officers were white men. No one saw Tarzan, yet he was here and
there about and among them for two hours. He inspected the insignia
upon their uniforms and saw that they were not the same as that
which he had taken from one of the dead soldiers at the bungalow
and then he passed on ahead of them, unseen in the dense bush. He
had come upon Germans and had not killed them; but it was because
the killing of Germans at large was not yet the prime motive of
his existence--now it was to discover the individual who slew his
mate.

After he had accounted for him he would take up the little matter
of slaying ALL Germans who crossed his path, and he meant that many
should cross it, for he would hunt them precisely as professional
hunters hunt the man-eaters.

As he neared the front lines the troops became more numerous. There
were motor trucks and ox teams and all the impedimenta of a small
army and always there were wounded men walking or being carried
toward the rear. He had crossed the railroad some distance back and
judged that the wounded were being taken to it for transportation
to a base hospital and possibly as far away as Tanga on the coast.

It was dusk when he reached a large camp hidden in the foothills of
the Pare Mountains. As he was approaching from the rear he found
it but lightly guarded and what sentinels there were, were not
upon the alert, and so it was an easy thing for him to enter after
darkness had fallen and prowl about listening at the backs of tents,
searching for some clew to the slayer of his mate.

As he paused at the side of a tent before which sat a number of
native soldiers he caught a few words spoken in native dialect that
riveted his attention instantly: "The Waziri fought like devils;
but we are greater fighters and we killed them all.  When we were
through the captain came and killed the woman. He stayed outside
and yelled in a very loud voice until all the men were killed.
Underlieutenant von Goss is braver--he came in and stood beside the
door shouting at us, also in a very loud voice, and bade us nail
one of the Waziri who was wounded to the wall, and then he laughed
loudly because the man suffered. We all laughed. It was very funny."

Like a beast of prey, grim and terrible, Tarzan crouched in the
shadows beside the tent. What thoughts passed through that savage
mind? Who may say? No outward sign of passion was revealed by the
expression of the handsome face; the cold, gray eyes denoted only
intense watchfulness. Presently the soldier Tarzan had heard first
rose and with a parting word turned away. He passed within ten
feet of the ape-man and continued on toward the rear of the camp.
Tarzan followed and in the shadows of a clump of bushes overtook
his quarry. There was no sound as the man beast sprang upon the
back of his prey and bore it to the ground for steel fingers closed
simultaneously upon the soldier's throat, effectually stifling
any outcry. By the neck Tarzan dragged his victim well into the
concealment of the bushes.

"Make no sound," he cautioned in the man's own tribal dialect as
he released his hold upon the other's throat.

The fellow gasped for breath, rolling frightened eyes upward to
see what manner of creature it might be in whose power he was. In
the darkness he saw only a naked brown body bending above him; but
he still remembered the terrific strength of the mighty muscles
that had closed upon his wind and dragged him into the bushes as
though he had been but a little child. If any thought of resistance
had crossed his mind he must have discarded it at once, as he made
no move to escape.

"What is the name of the officer who killed the woman at the bungalow
where you fought with the Waziri?" asked Tarzan.

"Hauptmann Schneider," replied the black when he could again command
his voice.

"Where is he?" demanded the ape-man.

"He is here. It may be that he is at headquarters. Many of the
officers go there in the evening to receive orders."

"Lead me there," commanded Tarzan, "and if I am discovered I will
kill you immediately. Get up!"

The black rose and led the way by a roundabout route back through
the camp. Several times they were forced to hide while soldiers
passed; but at last they reached a great pile of baled hay from about
the corner of which the black pointed out a two-story building in
the distance.

"Headquarters," he said. "You can go no farther unseen.  There are
many soldiers about."

Tarzan realized that he could not proceed farther in company with
the black. He turned and looked at the fellow for a moment as though
pondering what disposition to make of him.

"You helped to crucify Wasimbu, the Waziri," he accused in a low
yet none the less terrible tone.

The black trembled, his knees giving beneath him. "He ordered us
to do it," he plead.

"Who ordered it done?" demanded Tarzan.

"Underlieutenant von Goss," replied the soldier. "He, too, is here."

"I shall find him," returned Tarzan, grimly. "You helped to crucify
Wasimbu, the Waziri, and, while he suffered, you laughed."

The fellow reeled. It was as though in the accusation he read also
his death sentence. With no other word Tarzan seized the man again
by the neck. As before there was no outcry. The giant muscles tensed.
The arms swung quickly upward and with them the body of the black
soldier who had helped to crucify Wasimbu, the Waziri, described a
circle in the air--once, twice, three times, and then it was flung
aside and the ape-man turned in the direction of General Kraut's
headquarters.

A single sentinel in the rear of the building barred the way.
Tarzan crawled, belly to the ground, toward him, taking advantage
of cover as only the jungle-bred beast of prey can do. When the
sentinel's eyes were toward him, Tarzan hugged the ground, motionless
as stone; when they were turned away, he moved swiftly forward.
Presently he was within charging distance. He waited until the man
had turned his back once more and then he rose and sped noiselessly
down upon him.  Again there was no sound as he carried the dead
body with him toward the building.

The lower floor was lighted, the upper dark. Through the windows
Tarzan saw a large front room and a smaller room in rear of it.
In the former were many officers. Some moved about talking to one
another, others sat at field tables writing.  The windows were open
and Tarzan could hear much of the conversation; but nothing that
interested him. It was mostly about the German successes in Africa
and conjectures as to when the German army in Europe would reach
Paris. Some said the Kaiser was doubtlessly already there, and
there was a great deal of damning Belgium.

In the smaller back room a large, red-faced man sat behind a table.
Some other officers were also sitting a little in rear of him,
while two stood at attention before the general, who was questioning
them. As he talked, the general toyed with an oil lamp that stood
upon the table before him. Presently there came a knock upon the
door and an aide entered the room. He saluted and reported: "Fraulein
Kircher has arrived, sir."

"Bid her enter," commanded the general, and then nodded to the two
officers before him in sign of dismissal.

The Fraulein, entering, passed them at the door. The officers in
the little room rose and saluted, the Fraulein acknowledging the
courtesy with a bow and a slight smile.  She was a very pretty
girl. Even the rough, soiled riding habit and the caked dust upon
her face could not conceal the fact, and she was young. She could
not have been over nineteen.

She advanced to the table behind which the general stood and, taking
a folded paper from an inside pocket of her coat, handed it to him.

"Be seated, Fraulein," he said, and another officer brought her
a chair. No one spoke while the general read the contents of the
paper.

Tarzan appraised the various people in the room. He wondered if one
might not be Hauptmann Schneider, for two of them were captains.
The girl he judged to be of the intelligence department--a spy.
Her beauty held no appeal for him--without a glimmer of compunction
he could have wrung that fair, young neck. She was German and that
was enough; but he had other and more important work before him.
He wanted Hauptmann Schneider.

Finally the general looked up from the paper.

"Good," he said to the girl, and then to one of his aides, "Send
for Major Schneider."

Major Schneider! Tarzan felt the short hairs at the back of his
neck rise. Already they had promoted the beast who had murdered
his mate--doubtless they had promoted him for that very crime.

The aide left the room and the others fell into a general conversation
from which it became apparent to Tarzan that the German East African
forces greatly outnumbered the British and that the latter were
suffering heavily. The ape-man stood so concealed in a clump of
bushes that he could watch the interior of the room without being
seen from within, while he was at the same time hidden from the view
of anyone who might chance to pass along the post of the sentinel
he had slain. Momentarily he was expecting a patrol or a relief to
appear and discover that the sentinel was missing, when he knew an
immediate and thorough search would be made.

Impatiently he awaited the coming of the man he sought and at
last he was rewarded by the reappearance of the aide who had been
dispatched to fetch him accompanied by an officer of medium size
with fierce, upstanding mustaches. The newcomer strode to the table,
halted and saluted, reporting.  The general acknowledged the salute
and turned toward the girl.

"Fraulein Kircher," he said, "allow me to present Major Schneider--"

Tarzan waited to hear no more. Placing a palm upon the sill of
the window he vaulted into the room into the midst of an astounded
company of the Kaiser's officers. With a stride he was at the table
and with a sweep of his hand sent the lamp crashing into the fat
belly of the general who, in his mad effort to escape cremation,
fell over backward, chair and all, upon the floor. Two of the aides
sprang for the ape-man who picked up the first and flung him in the
face of the other.  The girl had leaped from her chair and stood
flattened against the wall. The other officers were calling aloud
for the guard and for help. Tarzan's purpose centered upon but
a single individual and him he never lost sight of. Freed from
attack for an instant he seized Major Schneider, threw him over his
shoulder and was out of the window so quickly that the astonished
assemblage could scarce realize what had occurred.

A single glance showed him that the sentinel's post was still vacant
and a moment later he and his burden were in the shadows of the
hay dump. Major Schneider had made no outcry for the very excellent
reason that his wind was shut off. Now Tarzan released his grasp
enough to permit the man to breathe.

"If you make a sound you will be choked again," he said.

Cautiously and after infinite patience Tarzan passed the final
outpost. Forcing his captive to walk before him he pushed on toward
the west until, late into the night, he re-crossed the railway where
he felt reasonably safe from discovery. The German had cursed and
grumbled and threatened and asked questions; but his only reply
was another prod from Tarzan's sharp war spear. The ape-man herded
him along as he would have driven a hog with the difference that
he would have had more respect and therefore more consideration
for a hog.

Until now Tarzan had given little thought to the details of revenge.
Now he pondered what form the punishment should take. Of only one
thing was he certain--it must end in death.  Like all brave men
and courageous beasts Tarzan had little natural inclination to
torture--none, in fact; but this case was unique in his experience.
An inherent sense of justice called for an eye for an eye and his
recent oath demanded even more. Yes, the creature must suffer even
as he had caused Jane Clayton to suffer. Tarzan could not hope to
make the man suffer as he had suffered, since physical pain may
never approach the exquisiteness of mental torture.

All through the long night the ape-man goaded on the exhausted and
now terrified Hun. The awful silence of his captor wrought upon the
German's nerves. If he would only speak! Again and again Schneider
tried to force or coax a word from him; but always the result was
the same--continued silence and a vicious and painful prod from the
spear point. Schneider was bleeding and sore. He was so exhausted
that he staggered at every step, and often he fell only to be
prodded to his feet again by that terrifying and remorseless spear.

It was not until morning that Tarzan reached a decision and it came
to him then like an inspiration from above. A slow smile touched
his lips and he immediately sought a place to lie up and rest--he
wished his prisoner to be fit now for what lay in store for him.
Ahead was a stream which Tarzan had crossed the day before. He knew
the ford for a drinking place and a likely spot to make an easy
kill. Cautioning the German to utter silence with a gesture the
two approached the stream quietly. Down the game trail Tarzan saw
some deer about to leave the water. He shoved Schneider into the
brush at one side and, squatting next him, waited.  The German
watched the silent giant with puzzled, frightened eyes. In the new
dawn he, for the first time, was able to obtain a good look at his
captor, and, if he had been puzzled and frightened before, those
sensations were nothing to what he experienced now.

Who and what could this almost naked, white savage be?  He had
heard him speak but once--when he had cautioned him to silence--and
then in excellent German and the well-modulated tones of culture.
He watched him now as the fascinated toad watches the snake that
is about to devour it.  He saw the graceful limbs and symmetrical
body motionless as a marble statue as the creature crouched in the
concealment of the leafy foliage. Not a muscle, not a nerve moved.
He saw the deer coming slowly along the trail, down wind and
unsuspecting. He saw a buck pass--an old buck--and then a young and
plump one came opposite the giant in ambush, and Schneider's eyes
went wide and a scream of terror almost broke from his lips as he
saw the agile beast at his side spring straight for the throat of
the young buck and heard from those human lips the hunting roar of
a wild beast. Down went the buck and Tarzan and his captive had
meat. The ape-man ate his raw, but he permitted the German to build
a fire and cook his portion.

The two lay up until late in the afternoon and then took up the
journey once again--a journey that was so frightful to Schneider
because of his ignorance of its destination that he at times groveled
at Tarzan's feet begging for an explanation and for mercy; but on
and on in silence the ape-man went, prodding the failing Hun whenever
the latter faltered.

It was noon of the third day before they reached their destination.
After a steep climb and a short walk they halted at the edge of
a precipitous cliff and Schneider looked down into a narrow gulch
where a single tree grew beside a tiny rivulet and sparse grass
broke from a rock-strewn soil. Tarzan motioned him over the edge;
but the German drew back in terror. The Ape-man seized him and
pushed him roughly toward the brink. "Descend," he said. It was
the second time he had spoken in three days and perhaps his very
silence, ominous in itself, had done more to arouse terror in the
breast of the Boche than even the spear point, ever ready as it
always was.

Schneider looked fearfully over the edge; but was about to essay
the attempt when Tarzan halted him. "I am Lord Greystoke," he
said. "It was my wife you murdered in the Waziri country. You will
understand now why I came for you.  Descend."

The German fell upon his knees. "I did not murder your wife,"
he cried. "Have mercy! I did not murder your wife.  I do not know
anything about--"

"Descend!" snapped Tarzan, raising the point of his spear.  He knew
that the man lied and was not surprised that he did.  A man who
would murder for no cause would lie for less.  Schneider still
hesitated and pled. The ape-man jabbed him with the spear and Schneider
slid fearfully over the top and began the perilous descent. Tarzan
accompanied and assisted him over the worst places until at last
they were within a few feet of the bottom.

"Be quiet now," cautioned the ape-man. He pointed at the entrance
to what appeared to be a cave at the far end of the gulch. "There
is a hungry lion in there. If you can reach that tree before
he discovers you, you will have several days longer in which to
enjoy life and then--when you are too weak to cling longer to the
branches of the tree Numa, the man-eater, will feed again for the
last time." He pushed Schneider from his foothold to the ground
below. "Now run," he said.

The German trembling in terror started for the tree. He had almost
reached it when a horrid roar broke from the mouth of the cave and
almost simultaneously a gaunt, hunger mad lion leaped into the
daylight of the gulch. Schneider had but a few yards to cover;
but the lion flew over the ground to circumvent him while Tarzan
watched the race with a slight smile upon his lips.

Schneider won by a slender margin, and as Tarzan scaled the cliff
to the summit, he heard behind him mingled with the roaring of the
baffled cat, the gibbering of a human voice that was at the same
time more bestial than the beast's.

Upon the brink of the cliff the ape-man turned and looked back
into the gulch. High in the tree the German clung frantically to
a branch across which his body lay. Beneath him was Numa--waiting.

The ape-man raised his face to Kudu, the sun, and from his mighty
chest rose the savage victory cry of the bull ape.




Chapter III

In the German Lines


Tarzan was not yet fully revenged. There were many millions of
Germans yet alive--enough to keep Tarzan pleasantly occupied the
balance of his life, and yet not enough, should he kill them all,
to recompense him for the great loss he had suffered--nor could
the death of all those million Germans bring back his loved one.

While in the German camp in the Pare Mountains, which lie just
east of the boundary line between German and British East Africa,
Tarzan had overheard enough to suggest that the British were getting
the worst of the fighting in Africa. At first he had given the
matter but little thought, since, after the death of his wife, the
one strong tie that had held him to civilization, he had renounced
all mankind, considering himself no longer man, but ape.

After accounting for Schneider as satisfactorily as lay within his
power he circled Kilimanjaro and hunted in the foothills to the
north of that mightiest of mountains as he had discovered that in
the neighborhood of the armies there was no hunting at all. Some
pleasure he derived through conjuring mental pictures from time to
time of the German he had left in the branches of the lone tree at
the bottom of the high-walled gulch in which was penned the starving
lion. He could imagine the man's mental anguish as he became weakened
from hunger and maddened by thirst, knowing that sooner or later he
must slip exhausted to the ground where waited the gaunt man-eater.
Tarzan wondered if Schneider would have the courage to descend to
the little rivulet for water should Numa leave the gulch and enter
the cave, and then he pictured the mad race for the tree again
when the lion charged out to seize his prey as he was certain to
do, since the clumsy German could not descend to the rivulet without
making at least some slight noise that would attract Numa's attention.

But even this pleasure palled, and more and more the ape-man found
himself thinking of the English soldiers fighting against heavy
odds and especially of the fact that it was Germans who were beating
them. The thought made him lower his head and growl and it worried
him not a little--a bit, perhaps, because he was finding it difficult
to forget that he was an Englishman when he wanted only to be an
ape. And at last the time came when he could not longer endure the
thought of Germans killing Englishmen while he hunted in safety a
bare march away.

His decision made, he set out in the direction of the German camp,
no well-defined plan formulated; but with the general idea that
once near the field of operations he might find an opportunity to
harass the German command as he so well knew how to do. His way
took him along the gorge close to the gulch in which he had left
Schneider, and, yielding to a natural curiosity, he scaled the cliffs
and made his way to the edge of the gulch. The tree was empty, nor
was there sign of Numa, the lion. Picking up a rock he hurled it
into the gulch, where it rolled to the very entrance to the cave.
Instantly the lion appeared in the aperture; but such a different-looking
lion from the great sleek brute that Tarzan had trapped there two
weeks before. Now he was gaunt and emaciated, and when he walked
he staggered.

"Where is the German?" shouted Tarzan. "Was he good eating, or only
a bag of bones when he slipped and fell from the tree?"

Numa growled. "You look hungry, Numa," continued the ape-man. "You
must have been very hungry to eat all the grass from your lair and
even the bark from the tree as far up as you can reach. Would you
like another German?" and smiling he turned away.

A few minutes later he came suddenly upon Bara, the deer, asleep
beneath a tree, and as Tarzan was hungry he made a quick kill,
and squatting beside his prey proceeded to eat his fill. As he
was gnawing the last morsel from a bone his quick ears caught the
padding of stealthy feet behind him, and turning he confronted
Dango, the hyena, sneaking upon him.  With a growl the ape-man
picked up a fallen branch and hurled it at the skulking brute. "Go
away, eater of carrion!" he cried; but Dango was hungry and being
large and powerful he only snarled and circled slowly about as
though watching for an opportunity to charge. Tarzan of the Apes
knew Dango even better than Dango knew himself. He knew that the
brute, made savage by hunger, was mustering its courage for an
attack, that it was probably accustomed to man and therefore more
or less fearless of him and so he un-slung his heavy spear and
laid it ready at his side while he continued his meal, all the time
keeping a watchful eye upon the hyena.

He felt no fear, for long familiarity with the dangers of his wild
world had so accustomed him to them that he took whatever came as
a part of each day's existence as you accept the homely though no
less real dangers of the farm, the range, or the crowded metropolis.
Being jungle bred he was ready to protect his kill from all comers
within ordinary limitations of caution. Under favorable conditions
Tarzan would face even Numa himself and, if forced to seek safety
by flight, he could do so without any feeling of shame. There was
no braver creature roamed those savage wilds and at the same time
there was none more wise--the two factors that had permitted him
to survive.

Dango might have charged sooner but for the savage growls of the
ape-man--growls which, coming from human lips, raised a question
and a fear in the hyena's heart. He had attacked women and children
in the native fields and he had frightened their men about their
fires at night; but he never had seen a man-thing who made this
sound that reminded him more of Numa angry than of a man afraid.

When Tarzan had completed his repast he was about to rise and hurl
a clean-picked bone at the beast before he went his way, leaving
the remains of his kill to Dango; but a sudden thought stayed him
and instead he picked up the carcass of the deer, threw it over
his shoulder, and set off in the direction of the gulch. For a
few yards Dango followed, growling, and then realizing that he was
being robbed of even a taste of the luscious flesh he cast discretion
to the winds and charged. Instantly, as though Nature had given him
eyes in the back of his head, Tarzan sensed the impending danger
and, dropping Bara to the ground, turned with raised spear. Far
back went the brown, right hand and then forward, lightning-like,
backed by the power of giant muscles and the weight of his brawn
and bone. The spear, released at the right instant, drove straight
for Dango, caught him in the neck where it joined the shoulders
and passed through the body.

When he had withdrawn the shaft from the hyena Tarzan shouldered
both carcasses and continued on toward the gulch.  Below lay Numa
beneath the shade of the lone tree and at the ape-man's call he
staggered slowly to his feet, yet weak as he was, he still growled
savagely, even essaying a roar at the sight of his enemy. Tarzan
let the two bodies slide over the rim of the cliff. "Eat, Numa!"
he cried. "It may be that I shall need you again." He saw the lion,
quickened to new life at the sight of food, spring upon the body
of the deer and then he left him rending and tearing the flesh as
he bolted great pieces into his empty maw.

The following day Tarzan came within sight of the German lines.
From a wooded spur of the hills he looked down upon the enemy's
left flank and beyond to the British lines. His position gave him
a bird's-eye view of the field of battle, and his keen eyesight
picked out many details that would not have been apparent to a man
whose every sense was not trained to the highest point of perfection
as were the ape-man's. He noted machine-gun emplacements cunningly
hidden from the view of the British and listening posts placed well
out in No Man's Land.

As his interested gaze moved hither and thither from one point of
interest to another he heard from a point upon the hillside below
him, above the roar of cannon and the crack of rifle fire, a single
rifle spit. Immediately his attention was centered upon the spot
where he knew a sniper must be hid.  Patiently he awaited the next
shot that would tell him more surely the exact location of the
rifleman, and when it came he moved down the steep hillside with
the stealth and quietness of a panther. Apparently he took no
cognizance of where he stepped, yet never a loose stone was disturbed
nor a twig broken--it was as though his feet saw.

Presently, as he passed through a clump of bushes, he came to the
edge of a low cliff and saw upon a ledge some fifteen feet below
him a German soldier prone behind an embankment of loose rock and
leafy boughs that hid him from the view of the British lines. The
man must have been an excellent shot, for he was well back of the
German lines, firing over the heads of his fellows. His high-powered
rifle was equipped with telescope sights and he also carried
binoculars which he was in the act of using as Tarzan discovered
him, either to note the effect of his last shot or to discover
a new target. Tarzan let his eye move quickly toward that part of
the British line the German seemed to be scanning, his keen sight
revealing many excellent targets for a rifle placed so high above
the trenches.

The Hun, evidently satisfied with his observations, laid aside
his binoculars and again took up his rifle, placed its butt in the
hollow of his shoulder and took careful aim. At the same instant a
brown body sprang outward from the cliff above him.  There was no
sound and it is doubtful that the German ever knew what manner of
creature it was that alighted heavily upon his back, for at the
instant of impact the sinewy fingers of the ape-man circled the
hairy throat of the Boche. There was a moment of futile struggling
followed by the sudden realization of dissolution--the sniper was
dead.

Lying behind the rampart of rocks and boughs, Tarzan looked down
upon the scene below. Near at hand were the trenches of the Germans.
He could see officers and men moving about in them and almost in
front of him a well-hidden machine gun was traversing No Man's Land
in an oblique direction, striking the British at such an angle as
to make it difficult for them to locate it.

Tarzan watched, toying idly with the rifle of the dead German.
Presently he fell to examining the mechanism of the piece. He
glanced again toward the German trenches and changed the adjustment
of the sights, then he placed the rifle to his shoulder and took
aim. Tarzan was an excellent shot. With his civilized friends he
had hunted big game with the weapons of civilization and though he
never had killed except for food or in self-defense he had amused
himself firing at inanimate targets thrown into the air and had
perfected himself in the use of firearms without realizing that
he had done so. Now indeed would he hunt big game. A slow smile
touched his lips as his finger closed gradually upon the trigger.
The rifle spoke and a German machine gunner collapsed behind his
weapon. In three minutes Tarzan picked off the crew of that gun.
Then he spotted a German officer emerging from a dugout and the
three men in the bay with him. Tarzan was careful to leave no one
in the immediate vicinity to question how Germans could be shot in
German trenches when they were entirely concealed from enemy view.

Again adjusting his sights he took a long-range shot at a distant
machine-gun crew to his right. With calm deliberation he wiped them
out to a man. Two guns were silenced. He saw men running through
the trenches and he picked off several of them. By this time the
Germans were aware that something was amiss--that an uncanny sniper
had discovered a point of vantage from which this sector of the
trenches was plainly visible to him. At first they sought to discover
his location in No Man's Land; but when an officer looking over
the parapet through a periscope was struck full in the back of the
head with a rifle bullet which passed through his skull and fell
to the bottom of the trench they realized that it was beyond the
parados rather than the parapet that they should search.

One of the soldiers picked up the bullet that had killed his
officer, and then it was that real excitement prevailed in that
particular bay, for the bullet was obviously of German make.  Hugging
the parados, messengers carried the word in both directions and
presently periscopes were leveled above the parados and keen eyes
were searching out the traitor. It did not take them long to locate
the position of the hidden sniper and then Tarzan saw a machine
gun being trained upon him.  Before it had gotten into action its
crew lay dead about it; but there were other men to take their
places, reluctantly perhaps; but driven on by their officers they
were forced to it and at the same time two other machine guns were
swung around toward the ape-man and put into operation.

Realizing that the game was about up Tarzan with a farewell shot
laid aside the rifle and melted into the hills behind him. For many
minutes he could hear the sputter of machinegun fire concentrated
upon the spot he had just quit and smiled as he contemplated the
waste of German ammunition.

"They have paid heavily for Wasimbu, the Waziri, whom they crucified,
and for his slain fellows," he mused; "but for Jane they can never
pay--no, not if I killed them all."

After dark that night he circled the flanks of both armies and
passed through the British out-guards and into the British lines.
No man saw him come. No man knew that he was there.

Headquarters of the Second Rhodesians occupied a sheltered position
far enough back of the lines to be comparatively safe from enemy
observation. Even lights were permitted, and Colonel Capell sat
before a field table, on which was spread a military map, talking
with several of his officers.  A large tree spread above them, a
lantern sputtered dimly upon the table, while a small fire burned
upon the ground close at hand. The enemy had no planes and no other
observers could have seen the lights from the German lines.

The officers were discussing the advantage in numbers possessed by
the enemy and the inability of the British to more than hold their
present position. They could not advance. Already they had sustained
severe losses in every attack and had always been driven back by
overwhelming numbers. There were hidden machine guns, too, that
bothered the colonel considerably. It was evidenced by the fact
that he often reverted to them during the conversation.

"Something silenced them for a while this afternoon," said one of
the younger officers. "I was observing at the time and I couldn't
make out what the fuss was about; but they seemed to be having a
devil of a time in a section of trench on their left. At one time I
could have sworn they were attacked in the rear--I reported it to
you at the time, sir, you'll recall--for the blighters were pepperin'
away at the side of that bluff behind them. I could see the dirt
fly. I don't know what it could have been."

There was a slight rustling among the branches of the tree above
them and simultaneously a lithe, brown body dropped in their midst.
Hands moved quickly to the butts of pistols; but otherwise there
was no movement among the officers.  First they looked wonderingly
at the almost naked white man standing there with the firelight
playing upon rounded muscles, took in the primitive attire and
the equally primitive armament and then all eyes turned toward the
colonel.

"Who the devil are you, sir?" snapped that officer.

"Tarzan of the Apes," replied the newcomer.

"Oh, Greystoke!" cried a major, and stepped forward with  outstretched
hand.

"Preswick," acknowledged Tarzan as he took the proffered  hand.

"I didn't recognize you at first," apologized the major. "The
last time I saw you you were in London in evening dress.  Quite a
difference--'pon my word, man, you'll have to admit it."

Tarzan smiled and turned toward the colonel. "I overheard your
conversation," he said. "I have just come from behind the German
lines. Possibly I can help you."

The colonel looked questioningly toward Major Preswick who quickly
rose to the occasion and presented the ape-man to his commanding
officer and fellows. Briefly Tarzan told them what it was that
brought him out alone in pursuit of the Germans.

"And now you have come to join us?" asked the colonel.

Tarzan shook his head. "Not regularly," he replied. "I must fight
in my own way; but I can help you. Whenever I wish I can enter the
German lines."

Capell smiled and shook his head. "It's not so easy as you think,"
he said; "I've lost two good officers in the last week trying it--and
they were experienced men; none better in the Intelligence Department."

"Is it more difficult than entering the British lines?" asked
Tarzan.

The colonel was about to reply when a new thought appeared to occur
to him and he looked quizzically at the ape-man. "Who brought you
here?" he asked. "Who passed you through our out-guards?"

"I have just come through the German lines and yours and passed
through your camp," he replied. "Send word to ascertain if anyone
saw me."

"But who accompanied you?" insisted Capell.

"I came alone," replied Tarzan and then, drawing himself to
his full height, "You men of civilization, when you come into the
jungle, are as dead among the quick. Manu, the monkey, is a sage
by comparison. I marvel that you exist at all--only your numbers,
your weapons, and your power of reasoning save you. Had I a few
hundred great apes with your reasoning power I could drive the
Germans into the ocean as quickly as the remnant of them could
reach the coast. Fortunate it is for you that the dumb brutes cannot
combine. Could they, Africa would remain forever free of men. But
come, can I help you? Would you like to know where several machinegun
emplacements are hidden?"

The colonel assured him that they would, and a moment later Tarzan
had traced upon the map the location of three that had been bothering
the English. "There is a weak spot here," he said, placing a finger
upon the map. "It is held by blacks; but the machine guns out in
front are manned by whites. If--wait! I have a plan. You can fill
that trench with your own men and enfilade the trenches to its
right with their own machine guns."

Colonel Capell smiled and shook his head. "It sounds very easy,"
he said.

"It IS easy--for me," replied the ape-man. "I can empty that section
of trench without a shot. I was raised in the jungle--I know the
jungle folk--the Gomangani as well as the others. Look for me again
on the second night," and he turned to leave.

"Wait," said the colonel. "I will send an officer to pass you
through the lines."

Tarzan smiled and moved away. As he was leaving the little group
about headquarters he passed a small figure wrapped in an officer's
heavy overcoat. The collar was turned up and the visor of the
military cap pulled well down over the eyes; but, as the ape-man
passed, the light from the fire illuminated the features of the
newcomer for an instant, revealing to Tarzan a vaguely familiar
face. Some officer he had known in London, doubtless, he surmised,
and went his way through the British camp and the British lines
all unknown to the watchful sentinels of the out-guard.

Nearly all night he moved across Kilimanjaro's foothills, tracking
by instinct an unknown way, for he guessed that what he sought would
be found on some wooded slope higher up than he had come upon his
other recent journeys in this, to him, little known country. Three
hours before dawn his keen nostrils apprised him that somewhere in
the vicinity he would find what he wanted, and so he climbed into
a tall tree and settled himself for a few hours' sleep.




Chapter IV

When the Lion Fed


Kudu, the sun, was well up in the heavens when Tarzan awoke. The
ape-man stretched his giant limbs, ran his fingers through his thick
hair, and swung lightly down to earth. Immediately he took up the
trail he had come in search of, following it by scent down into
a deep ravine. Cautiously he went now, for his nose told him that
the quarry was close at hand, and presently from an overhanging
bough he looked down upon Horta, the boar, and many of his kinsmen.
Un-slinging his bow and selecting an arrow, Tarzan fitted the shaft
and, drawing it far back, took careful aim at the largest of the
great pigs. In the ape-man's teeth were other arrows, and no sooner
had the first one sped, than he had fitted and shot another bolt.
Instantly the pigs were in turmoil, not knowing from whence the
danger threatened. They stood stupidly at first and then commenced
milling around until six of their number lay dead or dying about
them; then with a chorus of grunts and squeals they started off at
a wild run, disappearing quickly in the dense underbrush.

Tarzan then descended from the tree, dispatched those that were not
already dead and proceeded to skin the carcasses.  As he worked,
rapidly and with great skill, he neither hummed nor whistled as
does the average man of civilization. It was in numerous little
ways such as these that he differed from other men, due, probably,
to his early jungle training. The beasts of the jungle that he had
been reared among were playful to maturity but seldom thereafter.
His fellow-apes, especially the bulls, became fierce and surly as
they grew older. Life was a serious matter during lean seasons--one
had to fight to secure one's share of food then, and the habit once
formed became lifelong. Hunting for food was the life labor of the
jungle bred, and a life labor is a thing not to be approached with
levity nor prosecuted lightly. So all work found Tarzan serious,
though he still retained what the other beasts lost as they grew
older--a sense of humor, which he gave play to when the mood suited
him. It was a grim humor and sometimes ghastly; but it satisfied
Tarzan.

Then, too, were one to sing and whistle while working on the ground,
concentration would be impossible. Tarzan possessed the ability to
concentrate each of his five senses upon its particular business.
Now he worked at skinning the six pigs and his eyes and his fingers
worked as though there was naught else in all the world than these
six carcasses; but his ears and his nose were as busily engaged
elsewhere--the former ranging the forest all about and the latter
assaying each passing zephyr. It was his nose that first discovered
the approach of Sabor, the lioness, when the wind shifted for a
moment.

As clearly as though he had seen her with his eyes, Tarzan knew
that the lioness had caught the scent of the freshly killed pigs
and immediately had moved down wind in their direction. He knew
from the strength of the scent spoor and the rate of the wind about
how far away she was and that she was approaching from behind him.
He was finishing the last pig and he did not hurry. The five pelts
lay close at hand--he had been careful to keep them thus together
and near him--an ample tree waved its low branches above him.

He did not even turn his head for he knew she was not yet in sight;
but he bent his ears just a bit more sharply for the first sound
of her nearer approach. When the final skin had been removed he
rose. Now he heard Sabor in the bushes to his rear, but not yet
too close. Leisurely he gathered up the six pelts and one of the
carcasses, and as the lioness appeared between the boles of two
trees he swung upward into the branches above him. Here he hung
the hides over a limb, seated himself comfortably upon another with
his back against the bole of the tree, cut a hind quarter from
the carcass he had carried with him and proceeded to satisfy his
hunger. Sabor slunk, growling, from the brush, cast a wary eye
upward toward the ape-man and then fell upon the nearest carcass.

Tarzan looked down upon her and grinned, recalling an argument he
had once had with a famous big-game hunter who had declared that
the king of beasts ate only what he himself had killed. Tarzan knew
better for he had seen Numa and Sabor stoop even to carrion.

Having filled his belly, the ape-man fell to work upon the hides--all
large and strong. First he cut strips from them about half an inch
wide. When he had sufficient number of these strips he sewed two of
the hides together, afterwards piercing holes every three or four
inches around the edges.  Running another strip through these
holes gave him a large bag with a drawstring. In similar fashion he
produced four other like bags, but smaller, from the four remaining
hides and had several strips left over.

All this done he threw a large, juicy fruit at Sabor, cached the
remainder of the pig in a crotch of the tree and swung off toward
the southwest through the middle terraces of the forest, carrying
his five bags with him. Straight he went to the rim of the gulch
where he had imprisoned Numa, the lion.  Very stealthily he approached
the edge and peered over.  Numa was not in sight. Tarzan sniffed
and listened. He could hear nothing, yet he knew that Numa must be
within the cave.  He hoped that he slept--much depended upon Numa
not discovering him.

Cautiously he lowered himself over the edge of the cliff, and with
utter noiselessness commenced the descent toward the bottom of the
gulch. He stopped often and turned his keen eyes and ears in the
direction of the cave's mouth at the far end of the gulch, some
hundred feet away. As he neared the foot of the cliff his danger
increased greatly. If he could reach the bottom and cover half
the distance to the tree that stood in the center of the gulch he
would feel comparatively safe for then, even if Numa appeared, he
felt that he could beat him either to the cliff or to the tree,
but to scale the first thirty feet of the cliff rapidly enough to
elude the leaping beast would require a running start of at least
twenty feet as there were no very good hand- or footholds close
to the bottom--he had had to run up the first twenty feet like
a squirrel running up a tree that other time he had beaten an
infuriated Numa to it. He had no desire to attempt it again unless
the conditions were equally favorable at least, for he had escaped
Numa's raking talons by only a matter of inches on the former
occasion.

At last he stood upon the floor of the gulch. Silent as a disembodied
spirit he advanced toward the tree. He was half way there and no
sign of Numa. He reached the scarred bole from which the famished
lion had devoured the bark and even torn pieces of the wood itself
and yet Numa had not appeared.  As he drew himself up to the lower
branches he commenced to wonder if Numa were in the cave after
all. Could it be possible that he had forced the barrier of rocks
with which Tarzan had plugged the other end of the passage where
it opened into the outer world of freedom? Or was Numa dead?  The
ape-man doubted the verity of the latter suggestion as he had fed
the lion the entire carcasses of a deer and a hyena only a few
days since--he could not have starved in so short a time, while the
little rivulet running across the gulch furnished him with water
a-plenty.

Tarzan started to descend and investigate the cavern when it occurred
to him that it would save effort were he to lure Numa out instead.
Acting upon the thought he uttered a low growl. Immediately he was
rewarded by the sound of a movement within the cave and an instant
later a wild-eyed, haggard lion rushed forth ready to face the
devil himself were he edible.  When Numa saw Tarzan, fat and sleek,
perched in the tree he became suddenly the embodiment of frightful
rage. His eyes and his nose told him that this was the creature
responsible for his predicament and also that this creature was
good to eat. Frantically the lion sought to scramble up the bole of
the tree. Twice he leaped high enough to catch the lowest branches
with his paws, but both times he fell backward to the earth. Each
time he became more furious. His growls and roars were incessant
and horrible and all the time Tarzan sat grinning down upon him,
taunting him in jungle billingsgate for his inability to reach
him and mentally exulting that always Numa was wasting his already
waning strength.

Finally the ape-man rose and un-slung his rope. He arranged the
coils carefully in his left hand and the noose in his right, and
then he took a position with each foot on one of two branches that
lay in about the same horizontal plane and with his back pressed
firmly against the stem of the tree. There he stood hurling insults
at Numa until the beast was again goaded into leaping upward at
him, and as Numa rose the noose dropped quickly over his head and
about his neck. A quick movement of Tarzan's rope hand tightened
the coil and when Numa slipped backward to the ground only his hind
feet touched, for the ape-man held him swinging by the neck.

Moving slowly outward upon the two branches Tarzan swung Numa out
so that he could not reach the bole of the tree with his raking
talons, then he made the rope fast after drawing the lion clear
of the ground, dropped his five pigskin sacks to earth and leaped
down himself. Numa was striking frantically at the grass rope with
his fore claws. At any moment he might sever it and Tarzan must,
therefore, work rapidly.

First he drew the larger bag over Numa's head and secured it about
his neck with the draw string, then he managed, after considerable
effort, during which he barely escaped being torn to ribbons by
the mighty talons, to hog-tie Numa--drawing his four legs together
and securing them in that position with the strips trimmed from
the pigskins.

By this time the lion's efforts had almost ceased--it was evident
that he was being rapidly strangled and as that did not at all
suit the purpose of the Tarmangani the latter swung again into the
tree, unfastened the rope from above and lowered the lion to the
ground where he immediately followed it and loosed the noose about
Numa's neck. Then he drew his hunting knife and cut two round holes
in the front of the head bag opposite the lion's eyes for the double
purpose of permitting him to see and giving him sufficient air to
breathe.

This done Tarzan busied himself fitting the other bags, one over
each of Numa's formidably armed paws. Those on the hind feet he
secured not only by tightening the draw strings but also rigged
garters that fastened tightly around the legs above the hocks.
He secured the front-feet bags in place similarly above the great
knees. Now, indeed, was Numa, the lion, reduced to the harmlessness
of Bara, the deer.

By now Numa was showing signs of returning life. He gasped for
breath and struggled; but the strips of pigskin that held his four
legs together were numerous and tough. Tarzan watched and was sure
that they would hold, yet Numa is mightily muscled and there was
the chance, always, that he might struggle free of his bonds after
which all would depend upon the efficacy of Tarzan's bags and draw
strings.

After Numa had again breathed normally and was able to roar
out his protests and his rage, his struggles increased to Titanic
proportions for a short time; but as a lion's powers of endurance
are in no way proportionate to his size and strength he soon tired
and lay quietly. Amid renewed growling and another futile attempt
to free himself, Numa was finally forced to submit to the further
indignity of having a rope secured about his neck; but this time
it was no noose that might tighten and strangle him; but a bowline
knot, which does not tighten or slip under strain.

The other end of the rope Tarzan fastened to the stem of the tree,
then he quickly cut the bonds securing Numa's legs and leaped aside
as the beast sprang to his feet. For a moment the lion stood with
legs far outspread, then he raised first one paw and then another,
shaking them energetically in an effort to dislodge the strange
footgear that Tarzan had fastened upon them. Finally he began to paw
at the bag upon his head. The ape-man, standing with ready spear,
watched Numa's efforts intently. Would the bags hold? He sincerely
hoped so. Or would all his labor prove fruitless?

As the clinging things upon his feet and face resisted his every
effort to dislodge them, Numa became frantic. He rolled upon the
ground, fighting, biting, scratching, and roaring; he leaped to his
feet and sprang into the air; he charged Tarzan, only to be brought
to a sudden stop as the rope securing him to the tree tautened.
Then Tarzan stepped in and rapped him smartly on the head with the
shaft of his spear.  Numa reared upon his hind feet and struck at
the ape-man and in return received a cuff on one ear that sent him
reeling sideways. When he returned to the attack he was again sent
sprawling. After the fourth effort it appeared to dawn upon the king
of beasts that he had met his master, his head and tail dropped and
when Tarzan advanced upon him he backed away, though still growling.

Leaving Numa tied to the tree Tarzan entered the tunnel and removed
the barricade from the opposite end, after which he returned to
the gulch and strode straight for the tree.  Numa lay in his path
and as Tarzan approached growled menacingly. The ape-man cuffed
him aside and unfastened the rope from the tree. Then ensued a
half-hour of stubbornly fought battle while Tarzan endeavored to
drive Numa through the tunnel ahead of him and Numa persistently
refused to be driven. At last, however, by dint of the unrestricted
use of his spear point, the ape-man succeeded in forcing the lion
to move ahead of him and eventually guided him into the passageway.
Once inside, the problem became simpler since Tarzan followed closely
in the rear with his sharp spear point, an unremitting incentive
to forward movement on the part of the lion. If Numa hesitated he
was prodded. If he backed up the result was extremely painful and
so, being a wise lion who was learning rapidly, he decided to keep
on going and at the end of the tunnel, emerging into the outer
world, he sensed freedom, raised his head and tail and started off
at a run.

Tarzan, still on his hands and knees just inside the entrance, was
taken unaware with the result that he was sprawled forward upon
his face and dragged a hundred yards across the rocky ground before
Numa was brought to a stand. It was a scratched and angry Tarzan
who scrambled to his feet. At first he was tempted to chastise
Numa; but, as the ape-man seldom permitted his temper to guide him
in any direction not countenanced by reason, he quickly abandoned
the idea.

Having taught Numa the rudiments of being driven, he now urged him
forward and there commenced as strange a journey as the unrecorded
history of the jungle contains. The balance of that day was eventful
both for Tarzan and for Numa. From open rebellion at first the lion
passed through stages of stubborn resistance and grudging obedience
to final surrender. He was a very tired, hungry, and thirsty lion
when night overtook them; but there was to be no food for him that
day or the next--Tarzan did not dare risk removing the head bag,
though he did cut another hole which permitted Numa to quench his
thirst shortly after dark. Then he tied him to a tree, sought food
for himself, and stretched out among the branches above his captive
for a few hours' sleep.

Early the following morning they resumed their journey, winding over
the low foothills south of Kilimanjaro, toward the east. The beasts
of the jungle who saw them took one look and fled. The scent spoor
of Numa, alone, might have been enough to have provoked flight in
many of the lesser animals, but the sight of this strange apparition
that smelled like a lion, but looked like nothing they ever had
seen before, being led through the jungles by a giant Tarmangani
was too much for even the more formidable denizens of the wild.

Sabor, the lioness, recognizing from a distance the scent of her
lord and master intermingled with that of a Tarmangani and the
hide of Horta, the boar, trotted through the aisles of the forest
to investigate. Tarzan and Numa heard her coming, for she voiced
a plaintive and questioning whine as the baffling mixture of odors
aroused her curiosity and her fears, for lions, however terrible
they may appear, are often timid animals and Sabor, being of the
gentler sex, was, naturally, habitually inquisitive as well.

Tarzan un-slung his spear for he knew that he might now easily have
to fight to retain his prize. Numa halted and turned his outraged
head in the direction of the coming she.  He voiced a throaty growl
that was almost a purr. Tarzan was upon the point of prodding him
on again when Sabor broke into view, and behind her the ape-man saw
that which gave him instant pause--four full-grown lions trailing
the lioness.

To have goaded Numa then into active resistance might have brought
the whole herd down upon him and so Tarzan waited to learn first
what their attitude would be. He had no idea of relinquishing his
lion without a battle; but knowing lions as he did, he knew that
there was no assurance as to just what the newcomers would do.

The lioness was young and sleek, and the four males were in their
prime--as handsome lions as he ever had seen. Three of the males
were scantily maned but one, the foremost, carried a splendid,
black mane that rippled in the breeze as he trotted majestically
forward. The lioness halted a hundred feet from Tarzan, while the
lions came on past her and stopped a few feet nearer. Their ears
were upstanding and their eyes filled with curiosity. Tarzan could
not even guess what they might do. The lion at his side faced them
fully, standing silent now and watchful.

Suddenly the lioness gave vent to another little whine, at which
Tarzan's lion voiced a terrific roar and leaped forward straight
toward the beast of the black mane. The sight of this awesome
creature with the strange face was too much for the lion toward
which he leaped, dragging Tarzan after him, and with a growl the
lion turned and fled, followed by his companions and the she.

Numa attempted to follow them; Tarzan held him in leash and when
he turned upon him in rage, beat him unmercifully across the head
with his spear. Shaking his head and growling, the lion at last moved
off again in the direction they had been traveling; but it was an
hour before he ceased to sulk. He was very hungry--half famished
in fact--and consequently of an ugly temper, yet so thoroughly
subdued by Tarzan's heroic methods of lion taming that he was
presently pacing along at the ape-man's side like some huge St.
Bernard.

It was dark when the two approached the British right, after a
slight delay farther back because of a German patrol it had been
necessary to elude. A short distance from the British line of
out-guard sentinels Tarzan tied Numa to a tree and continued on
alone. He evaded a sentinel, passed the out-guard and support, and
by devious ways came again to Colonel Capell's headquarters, where
he appeared before the officers gathered there as a disembodied
spirit materializing out of thin air.

When they saw who it was that came thus unannounced they smiled
and the colonel scratched his head in perplexity.

"Someone should be shot for this," he said. "I might just as well
not establish an out-post if a man can filter through whenever he
pleases."

Tarzan smiled. "Do not blame them," he said, "for I am not a man.
I am Tarmangani. Any Mangani who wished to, could enter your camp
almost at will; but if you have them for sentinels no one could
enter without their knowledge."

"What are the Mangani?" asked the colonel. "Perhaps we might enlist
a bunch of the beggars."

Tarzan shook his head. "They are the great apes," he explained; "my
people; but you could not use them. They cannot concentrate long
enough upon a single idea. If I told them of this they would be
much interested for a short time--I might even hold the interest
of a few long enough to get them here and explain their duties to
them; but soon they would lose interest and when you needed them
most they might be off in the forest searching for beetles instead
of watching their posts. They have the minds of little children--that
is why they remain what they are."

"You call them Mangani and yourself Tarmangani--what is the
difference?" asked Major Preswick.

"Tar means white," replied Tarzan, "and Mangani, great ape. My name--the
name they gave me in the tribe of Kerchak--means White-skin. When
I was a little balu my skin, I presume, looked very white indeed
against the beautiful, black coat of Kala, my foster mother
and so they called me Tarzan, the Tarmangani. They call you, too,
Tarmangani," he concluded, smiling.

Capell smiled. "It is no reproach, Greystoke," he said; "and, by
Jove, it would be a mark of distinction if a fellow could act the
part. And now how about your plan? Do you still think you can empty
the trench opposite our sector?"

"Is it still held by Gomangani?" asked Tarzan.

"What are Gomangani?" inquired the colonel. "It is still held by
native troops, if that is what you mean."

"Yes," replied the ape-man, "the Gomangani are the great black
apes--the Negroes."

"What do you intend doing and what do you want us to do?" asked
Capell.

Tarzan approached the table and placed a finger on the map. "Here
is a listening post," he said; "they have a machine gun in it. A
tunnel connects it with this trench at this point." His finger moved
from place to place on the map as he talked.  "Give me a bomb and
when you hear it burst in this listening post let your men start
across No Man's Land slowly. Presently they will hear a commotion
in the enemy trench; but they need not hurry, and, whatever they
do, have them come quietly. You might also warn them that I may be
in the trench and that I do not care to be shot or bayoneted."

"And that is all?" queried Capell, after directing an officer to
give Tarzan a hand grenade; "you will empty the trench alone?"

"Not exactly alone," replied Tarzan with a grim smile; "but I shall
empty it, and, by the way, your men may come in through the tunnel
from the listening post if you prefer. In about half an hour,
Colonel," and he turned and left them.

As he passed through the camp there flashed suddenly upon the screen
of recollection, conjured there by some reminder of his previous
visit to headquarters, doubtless, the image of the officer he had
passed as he quit the colonel that other time and simultaneously
recognition of the face that had been revealed by the light from
the fire. He shook his head dubiously. No, it could not be and
yet the features of the young officer were identical with those of
Fraulein Kircher, the German spy he had seen at German headquarters
the night he took Major Schneider from under the nose of the Hun
general and his staff.

Beyond the last line of sentinels Tarzan moved quickly in the
direction of Numa, the lion. The beast was lying down as Tarzan
approached, but he rose as the ape-man reached his side. A low
whine escaped his muzzled lips. Tarzan smiled for he recognized in
the new note almost a supplication--it was more like the whine of
a hungry dog begging for food than the voice of the proud king of
beasts.

"Soon you will kill--and feed," he murmured in the vernacular of
the great apes.

He unfastened the rope from about the tree and, with Numa close
at his side, slunk into No Man's Land. There was little rifle fire
and only an occasional shell vouched for the presence of artillery
behind the opposing lines. As the shells from both sides were
falling well back of the trenches, they constituted no menace to
Tarzan; but the noise of them and that of the rifle fire had a marked
effect upon Numa who crouched, trembling, close to the Tarmangani
as though seeking protection.

Cautiously the two beasts moved forward toward the listening post
of the Germans. In one hand Tarzan carried the bomb the English had
given him, in the other was the coiled rope attached to the lion.
At last Tarzan could see the position a few yards ahead. His keen
eyes picked out the head and shoulders of the sentinel on watch.
The ape-man grasped the bomb firmly in his right hand. He measured
the distance with his eye and gathered his feet beneath him, then
in a single motion he rose and threw the missile, immediately
flattening himself prone upon the ground.

Five seconds later there was a terrific explosion in the center of
the listening post. Numa gave a nervous start and attempted to break
away; but Tarzan held him and, leaping to his feet, ran forward,
dragging Numa after him. At the edge of the post he saw below him
but slight evidence that the position had been occupied at all,
for only a few shreds of torn flesh remained. About the only thing
that had not been demolished was a machine gun which had been
protected by sand bags.

There was not an instant to lose. Already a relief might be crawling
through the communication tunnel, for it must have been evident to
the sentinels in the Hun trenches that the listening post had been
demolished. Numa hesitated to follow Tarzan into the excavation;
but the ape-man, who was in no mood to temporize, jerked him roughly
to the bottom.  Before them lay the mouth of the tunnel that led
back from No Man's Land to the German trenches. Tarzan pushed Numa
forward until his head was almost in the aperture, then as though
it were an afterthought, he turned quickly and, taking the machine
gun from the parapet, placed it in the bottom of the hole close
at hand, after which he turned again to Numa, and with his knife
quickly cut the garters that held the bags upon his front paws.
Before the lion could know that a part of his formidable armament
was again released for action, Tarzan had cut the rope from his
neck and the head bag from his face, and grabbing the lion from
the rear had thrust him partially into the mouth of the tunnel.

Then Numa balked, only to feel the sharp prick of Tarzan's knife
point in his hind quarters. Goading him on the ape-man finally
succeeded in getting the lion sufficiently far into the tunnel
so that there was no chance of his escaping other than by going
forward or deliberately backing into the sharp blade at his rear.
Then Tarzan cut the bags from the great hind feet, placed his
shoulder and his knife point against Numa's seat, dug his toes
into the loose earth that had been broken up by the explosion of
the bomb, and shoved.

Inch by inch at first Numa advanced. He was growling now and presently
he commenced to roar. Suddenly he leaped forward and Tarzan knew
that he had caught the scent of meat ahead. Dragging the machine
gun beside him the ape-man followed quickly after the lion whose
roars he could plainly hear ahead mingled with the unmistakable
screams of frightened men. Once again a grim smile touched the lips
of this man-beast.

"They murdered my Waziri," he muttered; "they crucified Wasimbu,
son of Muviro."

When Tarzan reached the trench and emerged into it there was no one
in sight in that particular bay, nor in the next, nor the next as
he hurried forward in the direction of the German center; but in the
fourth bay he saw a dozen men jammed in the angle of the traverse
at the end while leaping upon them and rending with talons and fangs
was Numa, a terrific incarnation of ferocity and ravenous hunger.

Whatever held the men at last gave way as they fought madly with
one another in their efforts to escape this dread creature that
from their infancy had filled them with terror, and again they
were retreating. Some clambered over the parados and some even over
the parapet preferring the dangers of No Man's Land to this other
soul-searing menace.

As the British advanced slowly toward the German trenches, they
first met terrified blacks who ran into their arms only too willing
to surrender. That pandemonium had broken loose in the Hun trench
was apparent to the Rhodesians not only from the appearance of the
deserters, but from the sounds of screaming, cursing men which came
clearly to their ears; but there was one that baffled them for it
resembled nothing more closely than the infuriated growling of an
angry lion.

And when at last they reached the trench, those farthest on the left
of the advancing Britishers heard a machine gun sputter suddenly
before them and saw a huge lion leap over the German parados with
the body of a screaming Hun soldier between his jaws and vanish
into the shadows of the night, while squatting upon a traverse to
their left was Tarzan of the Apes with a machine gun before him
with which he was raking the length of the German trenches.

The foremost Rhodesians saw something else--they saw a huge German
officer emerge from a dugout just in rear of the ape-man. They saw
him snatch up a discarded rifle with bayonet fixed and creep upon
the apparently unconscious Tarzan. They ran forward, shouting
warnings; but above the pandemonium of the trenches and the machine
gun their voices could not reach him. The German leaped upon the
parapet behind him--the fat hands raised the rifle butt aloft for
the cowardly downward thrust into the naked back and then, as moves
Ara, the lightning, moved Tarzan of the Apes.

It was no man who leaped forward upon that Boche officer,  striking
aside the sharp bayonet as one might strike aside a straw in a
baby's hand--it was a wild beast and the roar of a wild beast was
upon those savage lips, for as that strange sense that Tarzan owned
in common with the other jungle-bred creatures of his wild domain
warned him of the presence behind him and he had whirled to meet
the attack, his eyes had seen the corps and regimental insignia upon
the other's blouse--it was the same as that worn by the murderers
of his wife and his people, by the despoilers of his home and his
happiness.

It was a wild beast whose teeth fastened upon the shoulder of the
Hun--it was a wild beast whose talons sought that fat neck. And
then the boys of the Second Rhodesian Regiment saw that which will
live forever in their memories. They saw the giant ape-man pick
the heavy German from the ground and shake him as a terrier might
shake a rat--as Sabor, the lioness, sometimes shakes her prey.
They saw the eyes of the Hun bulge in horror as he vainly struck
with his futile hands against the massive chest and head of his
assailant. They saw Tarzan suddenly spin the man about and placing
a knee in the middle of his back and an arm about his neck bend
his shoulders slowly backward. The German's knees gave and he sank
upon them, but still that irresistible force bent him further and
further. He screamed in agony for a moment--then something snapped
and Tarzan cast him aside, a limp and lifeless thing.

The Rhodesians started forward, a cheer upon their lips--a cheer
that never was uttered--a cheer that froze in their throats, for
at that moment Tarzan placed a foot upon the carcass of his kill
and, raising his face to the heavens, gave voice to the weird and
terrifying victory cry of the bull ape.

Underlieutenant von Goss was dead.

Without a backward glance at the awe-struck soldiers Tarzan leaped
the trench and was gone.




Chapter V

The Golden Locket


The little British army in East Africa, after suffering severe
reverses at the hands of a numerically much superior force, was
at last coming into its own. The German offensive had been broken
and the Huns were now slowly and doggedly retreating along the
railway to Tanga. The break in the German lines had followed the
clearing of a section of their left-flank trenches of native soldiers
by Tarzan and Numa, the lion, upon that memorable night that the
ape-man had loosed a famishing man-eater among the superstitious
and terror-stricken blacks. The Second Rhodesian Regiment had
immediately taken possession of the abandoned trench and from this
position their flanking fire had raked contiguous sections of the
German line, the diversion rendering possible a successful night
attack on the part of the balance of the British forces.

Weeks had elapsed. The Germans were contesting stubbornly every
mile of waterless, thorn-covered ground and clinging desperately
to their positions along the railway. The officers of the Second
Rhodesians had seen nothing more of Tarzan of the Apes since he
had slain Underlieutenant von Goss and disappeared toward the very
heart of the German position, and there were those among them who
believed that he had been killed within the enemy lines.

"They may have killed him," assented Colonel Capell; "but I fancy
they never captured the beggar alive."

Nor had they, nor killed him either. Tarzan had spent those intervening
weeks pleasantly and profitably. He had amassed a considerable
fund of knowledge concerning the disposition and strength of German
troops, their methods of warfare, and the various ways in which a
lone Tarmangani might annoy an army and lower its morale.

At present he was prompted by a specific desire. There was a certain
German spy whom he wished to capture alive and take back to the
British. When he had made his first visit to German headquarters,
he had seen a young woman deliver a paper to the German general,
and later he had seen that same young woman within the British
lines in the uniform of a British officer. The conclusions were
obvious--she was a spy.

And so Tarzan haunted German headquarters upon many nights hoping
to see her again or to pick up some clew as to her whereabouts,
and at the same time he utilized many an artifice whereby he might
bring terror to the hearts of the Germans. That he was successful
was often demonstrated by the snatches of conversation he overheard as
he prowled through the German camps. One night as he lay concealed
in the bushes close beside a regimental headquarters he listened to
the conversation of several Boche officers. One of the men reverted
to the stories told by the native troops in connection with their
rout by a lion several weeks before and the simultaneous appearance
in their trenches of a naked, white giant whom they were perfectly
assured was some demon of the jungle.

"The fellow must have been the same as he who leaped into the
general's headquarters and carried off Schneider," asserted one.
"I wonder how he happened to single out the poor major. They say
the creature seemed interested in no one but Schneider. He had von
Kelter in his grasp, and he might easily have taken the general
himself; but he ignored them all except Schneider. Him he pursued
about the room, seized and carried off into the night. Gott knows
what his fate was."

"Captain Fritz Schneider has some sort of theory," said another.
"He told me only a week or two ago that he thinks he knows why his
brother was taken--that it was a case of mistaken identity. He was
not so sure about it until von Goss was killed, apparently by the
same creature, the night the lion entered the trenches. Von Goss was
attached to Schneider's company. One of Schneider's men was found
with his neck wrung the same night that the major was carried off
and Schneider thinks that this devil is after him and his
command--that it came for him that night and got his brother by
mistake. He says Kraut told him that in presenting the major to
Fraulein Kircher the former's name was no sooner spoken than this
wild man leaped through the window and made for him."

Suddenly the little group became rigid--listening. "What was that?"
snapped one, eyeing the bushes from which a smothered snarl had
issued as Tarzan of the Apes realized that through his mistake the
perpetrator of the horrid crime at his bungalow still lived--that
the murderer of his wife went yet unpunished.

For a long minute the officers stood with tensed nerves, every eye
riveted upon the bushes from whence the ominous sound had issued.
Each recalled recent mysterious disappearances from the heart of
camps as well as from lonely out-guards. Each thought of the silent
dead he had seen, slain almost within sight of their fellows by some
unseen creature. They thought of the marks upon dead throats--made
by talons or by giant fingers, they could not tell which--and those
upon shoulders and jugulars where powerful teeth had fastened and
they waited with drawn pistols.

Once the bushes moved almost imperceptibly and an instant later
one of the officers, without warning, fired into them; but Tarzan
of the Apes was not there. In the interval between the moving of
the bushes and the firing of the shot he had melted into the night.
Ten minutes later he was hovering on the outskirts of that part
of camp where were bivouacked for the night the black soldiers of
a native company commanded by one Hauptmann Fritz Schneider. The
men were stretched upon the ground without tents; but there were
tents pitched for the officers. Toward these Tarzan crept. It was
slow and perilous work, as the Germans were now upon the alert for
the uncanny foe that crept into their camps to take his toll by
night, yet the ape-man passed their sentinels, eluded the vigilance
of the interior guard, and crept at last to the rear of the officers'
line.

Here he flattened himself against the ground close behind the
nearest tent and listened. From within came the regular breathing
of a sleeping man--one only. Tarzan was satisfied.  With his knife
he cut the tie strings of the rear flap and entered. He made no
noise. The shadow of a falling leaf, floating gently to earth upon
a still day, could have been no more soundless. He moved to the
side of the sleeping man and bent low over him. He could not know,
of course, whether it was Schneider or another, as he had never seen
Schneider; but he meant to know and to know even more.  Gently he
shook the man by the shoulder. The fellow turned heavily and grunted
in a thick guttural.

"Silence!" admonished the ape-man in a low whisper. "Silence--I
kill."

The Hun opened his eyes. In the dim light he saw a giant figure
bending over him. Now a mighty hand grasped his shoulder and another
closed lightly about his throat.

"Make no outcry," commanded Tarzan; "but answer in a whisper my
questions. What is your name?"

"Luberg," replied the officer. He was trembling. The weird presence
of this naked giant filled him with dread. He, too, recalled the
men mysteriously murdered in the still watches of the night camps.
"What do you want?"

"Where is Hauptmann Fritz Schneider?" asked Tarzan, "Which is his
tent?"

"He is not here," replied Luberg. "He was sent to Wilhelmstal
yesterday."

"I shall not kill you--now," said the ape-man. "First I shall go
and learn if you have lied to me and if you have your death shall
be the more terrible. Do you know how Major Schneider died?"

Luberg shook his head negatively.

"I do," continued Tarzan, "and it was not a nice way to die--even
for an accursed German. Turn over with your face down and cover
your eyes. Do not move or make any sound."

The man did as he was bid and the instant that his eyes were turned
away, Tarzan slipped from the tent. An hour later he was outside
the German camp and headed for the little hill town of Wilhelmstal,
the summer seat of government of German East Africa.

Fraulein Bertha Kircher was lost. She was humiliated and angry--it
was long before she would admit it, that she, who prided herself
upon her woodcraft, was lost in this little patch of country between
the Pangani and the Tanga railway.  She knew that Wilhelmstal lay
southeast of her about fifty miles; but, through a combination of
untoward circumstances, she found herself unable to determine which
was southeast.

In the first place she had set out from German headquarters on a
well-marked road that was being traveled by troops and with every
reason to believe that she would follow that road to Wilhelmstal.
Later she had been warned from this road by word that a strong
British patrol had come down the west bank of the Pangani, effected
a crossing south of her, and was even then marching on the railway
at Tonda.

After leaving the road she found herself in thick bush and as the
sky was heavily overcast she presently had recourse to her compass
and it was not until then that she discovered to her dismay that
she did not have it with her. So sure was she of her woodcraft,
however, that she continued on in the direction she thought west
until she had covered sufficient distance to warrant her in feeling
assured that, by now turning south, she could pass safely in rear
of the British patrol.

Nor did she commence to feel any doubts until long after she had
again turned toward the east well south, as she thought, of the
patrol. It was late afternoon--she should long since have struck
the road again south of Tonda; but she had found no road and now
she began to feel real anxiety.

Her horse had traveled all day without food or water, night
was approaching and with it a realization that she was hopelessly
lost in a wild and trackless country notorious principally for its
tsetse flies and savage beasts. It was maddening to know that she
had absolutely no knowledge of the direction she was traveling--that
she might be forging steadily further from the railway, deeper
into the gloomy and forbidding country toward the Pangani; yet it
was impossible to stop--she must go on.

Bertha Kircher was no coward, whatever else she may have been, but
as night began to close down around her she could not shut out from
her mind entirely contemplation of the terrors of the long hours
ahead before the rising sun should dissipate the Stygian gloom--the
horrid jungle night--that lures forth all the prowling, preying
creatures of destruction.

She found, just before dark, an open meadow-like break in the
almost interminable bush. There was a small clump of trees near the
center and here she decided to camp. The grass was high and thick,
affording feed for her horse and a bed for herself, and there was
more than enough dead wood lying about the trees to furnish a good
fire well through the night. Removing the saddle and bridle from
her mount she placed them at the foot of a tree and then picketed
the animal close by. Then she busied herself collecting firewood
and by the time darkness had fallen she had a good fire and enough
wood to last until morning.

From her saddlebags she took cold food and from her canteen a
swallow of water. She could not afford more than a small swallow
for she could not know how long a time it might be before she should
find more. It filled her with sorrow that her poor horse must go
waterless, for even German spies may have hearts and this one was
very young and very feminine.

It was now dark. There was neither moon nor stars and the light
from her fire only accentuated the blackness beyond.  She could see
the grass about her and the boles of the trees which stood out in
brilliant relief against the solid background of impenetrable night,
and beyond the firelight there was nothing.

The jungle seemed ominously quiet. Far away in the distance she
heard faintly the boom of big guns; but she could not locate their
direction. She strained her ears until her nerves were on the point
of breaking; but she could not tell from whence the sound came. And
it meant so much to her to know, for the battle-lines were north
of her and if she could but locate the direction of the firing she
would know which way to go in the morning.

In the morning! Would she live to see another morning?  She squared
her shoulders and shook herself together. Such thoughts must be
banished--they would never do. Bravely she hummed an air as she
arranged her saddle near the fire and pulled a quantity of long
grass to make a comfortable seat over which she spread her saddle
blanket. Then she un-strapped a heavy, military coat from the cantle
of her saddle and donned it, for the air was already chill.

Seating herself where she could lean against the saddle she prepared
to maintain a sleepless vigil throughout the night. For an hour
the silence was broken only by the distant booming of the guns and
the low noises of the feeding horse and then, from possibly a mile
away, came the rumbling thunder of a lion's roar. The girl started
and laid her hand upon the rifle at her side. A little shudder ran
through her slight frame and she could feel the goose flesh rise
upon her body.

Again and again was the awful sound repeated and each time she was
certain that it came nearer. She could locate the direction of this
sound although she could not that of the guns, for the origin of
the former was much closer. The lion was up wind and so could not
have caught her scent as yet, though he might be approaching to
investigate the light of the fire which could doubtless be seen
for a considerable distance.

For another fear-filled hour the girl sat straining her eyes and
ears out into the black void beyond her little island of light.
During all that time the lion did not roar again; but there was
constantly the sensation that it was creeping upon her. Again and
again she would start and turn to peer into the blackness beyond
the trees behind her as her overwrought nerves conjured the stealthy
fall of padded feet. She held the rifle across her knees at the
ready now and she was trembling from head to foot.

Suddenly her horse raised his head and snorted, and with a little
cry of terror the girl sprang to her feet. The animal turned and
trotted back toward her until the picket rope brought him to a stand,
and then he wheeled about and with ears up-pricked gazed out into
the night; but the girl could neither see nor hear aught.

Still another hour of terror passed during which the horse often
raised his head to peer long and searchingly into the dark. The girl
replenished the fire from time to time. She found herself becoming
very sleepy. Her heavy lids persisted in drooping; but she dared
not sleep. Fearful lest she might be overcome by the drowsiness
that was stealing through her she rose and walked briskly to and
fro, then she threw some more wood on the fire, walked over and
stroked her horse's muzzle and returned to her seat.

Leaning against the saddle she tried to occupy her mind with plans
for the morrow; but she must have dozed. With a start she awoke.
It was broad daylight. The hideous night with its indescribable
terrors was gone.

She could scarce believe the testimony of her senses. She had slept
for hours, the fire was out and yet she and the horse were safe
and alive, nor was there sign of savage beast about.  And, best of
all, the sun was shining, pointing the straight road to the east.
Hastily she ate a few mouthfuls of her precious rations, which with
a swallow of water constituted her breakfast. Then she saddled her
horse and mounted. Already she felt that she was as good as safe
in Wilhelmstal.

Possibly, however, she might have revised her conclusions could she
have seen the two pairs of eyes watching her every move intently
from different points in the bush.

Light-hearted and unsuspecting, the girl rode across the clearing
toward the bush while directly before her two yellow-green eyes
glared round and terrible, a tawny tail twitched nervously and
great, padded paws gathered beneath a sleek barrel for a mighty
spring. The horse was almost at the edge of the bush when Numa,
the lion, launched himself through the air. He struck the animal's
right shoulder at the instant that it reared, terrified, to wheel
in flight. The force of the impact hurled the horse backward to the
ground and so quickly that the girl had no opportunity to extricate
herself; but fell to the earth with her mount, her left leg pinned
beneath its body.

Horror-stricken, she saw the king of beasts open his mighty jaws
and seize the screaming creature by the back of its neck.  The
great jaws closed, there was an instant's struggle as Numa shook
his prey. She could hear the vertebrae crack as the mighty fangs
crunched through them, and then the muscles of her faithful friend
relaxed in death.

Numa crouched upon his kill. His terrifying eyes riveted themselves
upon the girl's face--she could feel his hot breath upon her cheek
and the odor of the fetid vapor nauseated her.  For what seemed
an eternity to the girl the two lay staring at each other and then
the lion uttered a menacing growl.

Never before had Bertha Kircher been so terrified--never before had
she had such cause for terror. At her hip was a pistol--a formidable
weapon with which to face a man; but a puny thing indeed with
which to menace the great beast before her. She knew that at best
it could but enrage him and yet she meant to sell her life dearly,
for she felt that she must die. No human succor could have availed
her even had it been there to offer itself. For a moment she tore
her gaze from the hypnotic fascination of that awful face and
breathed a last prayer to her God. She did not ask for aid, for she
felt that she was beyond even divine succor--she only asked that
the end might come quickly and with as little pain as possible.

No one can prophesy what a lion will do in any given emergency.
This one glared and growled at the girl for a moment and then fell
to feeding upon the dead horse. Fraulein Kircher wondered for an
instant and then attempted to draw her leg cautiously from beneath
the body of her mount; but she could not budge it. She increased
the force of her efforts and Numa looked up from his feeding to
growl again.  The girl desisted. She hoped that he might satisfy
his hunger and then depart to lie up, but she could not believe
that he would leave her there alive. Doubtless he would drag the
remains of his kill into the bush for hiding and, as there could
be no doubt that he considered her part of his prey, he would
certainly come back for her, or possibly drag her in first and kill
her.

Again Numa fell to feeding. The girl's nerves were at the breaking
point. She wondered that she had not fainted under the strain
of terror and shock. She recalled that she often had wished she
might see a lion, close to, make a kill and feed upon it. God! how
realistically her wish had been granted.

Again she bethought herself of her pistol. As she had fallen, the
holster had slipped around so that the weapon now lay beneath her.
Very slowly she reached for it; but in so doing she was forced to
raise her body from the ground.  Instantly the lion was aroused.
With the swiftness of a cat he reached across the carcass of the
horse and placed a heavy, taloned paw upon her breast, crushing her
back to earth, and all the time he growled and snarled horribly.
His face was a picture of frightful rage incarnate. For a moment
neither moved and then from behind her the girl heard a human voice
uttering bestial sounds.

Numa suddenly looked up from the girl's face at the thing beyond
her. His growls increased to roars as he drew back, ripping the
front of the girl's waist almost from her body with his long talons,
exposing her white bosom, which through some miracle of chance the
great claws did not touch.

Tarzan of the Apes had witnessed the entire encounter from the
moment that Numa had leaped upon his prey. For some time before,
he had been watching the girl, and after the lion attacked her he
had at first been minded to let Numa have his way with her. What
was she but a hated German and a spy besides? He had seen her at
General Kraut's headquarters, in conference with the German staff
and again he had seen her within the British lines masquerading as
a British officer. It was the latter thought that prompted him to
interfere. Doubtless General Jan Smuts would be glad to meet and
question her. She might be forced to divulge information of value
to the British commander before Smuts had her shot.

Tarzan had recognized not only the girl, but the lion as well.  All
lions may look alike to you and me; but not so to their intimates
of the jungle. Each has his individual characteristics of face and
form and gait as well defined as those that differentiate members
of the human family, and besides these the creatures of the jungle
have a still more positive test--that of scent. Each of us, man or
beast, has his own peculiar odor, and it is mostly by this that
the beasts of the jungle, endowed with miraculous powers of scent,
recognize individuals.

It is the final proof. You have seen it demonstrated a thousand
times--a dog recognizes your voice and looks at you.  He knows your
face and figure. Good, there can be no doubt in his mind but that
it is you; but is he satisfied? No, sir--he must come up and smell
of you. All his other senses may be fallible, but not his sense of
smell, and so he makes assurance positive by the final test.

Tarzan recognized Numa as he whom he had muzzled with the hide of
Horta, the boar--as he whom he handled by a rope for two days and
finally loosed in a German front-line trench, and he knew that Numa
would recognize him--that he would remember the sharp spear that
had goaded him into submission and obedience and Tarzan hoped that
the lesson he had learned still remained with the lion.

Now he came forward calling to Numa in the language of the great
apes--warning him away from the girl. It is open to question that
Numa, the lion, understood him; but he did understand the menace of
the heavy spear that the Tarmangani carried so ready in his brown,
right hand, and so he drew back, growling, trying to decide in his
little brain whether to charge or flee.

On came the ape-man with never a pause, straight for the lion. "Go
away, Numa," he cried, "or Tarzan will tie you up again and lead
you through the jungle without food. See Arad, my spear! Do you
recall how his point stuck into you and how with his haft I beat
you over the head? Go, Numa!  I am Tarzan of the Apes!"

Numa wrinkled the skin of his face into great folds, until his
eyes almost disappeared and he growled and roared and snarled and
growled again, and when the spear point came at last quite close
to him he struck at it viciously with his armed paw; but he drew
back. Tarzan stepped over the dead horse and the girl lying behind
him gazed in wide-eyed astonishment at the handsome figure driving
an angry lion deliberately from its kill.

When Numa had retreated a few yards, the ape-man called back to
the girl in perfect German, "Are you badly hurt?"

"I think not," she replied; "but I cannot extricate my foot from
beneath my horse."

"Try again," commanded Tarzan. "I do not know how long I can hold
Numa thus."

The girl struggled frantically; but at last she sank back upon an
elbow.

"It is impossible," she called to him.

He backed slowly until he was again beside the horse, when he
reached down and grasped the cinch, which was still intact.  Then
with one hand he raised the carcass from the ground.  The girl
freed herself and rose to her feet.

"You can walk?" asked Tarzan.

"Yes," she said; "my leg is numb; but it does not seem to be
injured."

"Good," commented the ape-man. "Back slowly away behind me--make
no sudden movements. I think he will not charge."

With utmost deliberation the two backed toward the bush.  Numa
stood for a moment, growling, then he followed them, slowly. Tarzan
wondered if he would come beyond his kill or if he would stop there.
If he followed them beyond, then they could look for a charge, and
if Numa charged it was very likely that he would get one of them.
When the lion reached the carcass of the horse Tarzan stopped and
so did Numa, as Tarzan had thought that he would and the ape-man
waited to see what the lion would do next. He eyed them for a
moment, snarled angrily and then looked down at the tempting meat.
Presently he crouched upon his kill and resumed feeding.

The girl breathed a deep sigh of relief as she and the ape-man
resumed their slow retreat with only an occasional glance from the
lion, and when at last they reached the bush and had turned and
entered it, she felt a sudden giddiness overwhelm her so that she
staggered and would have fallen had Tarzan not caught her. It was
only a moment before she regained control of herself.

"I could not help it," she said, in half apology. "I was so close
to death--such a horrible death--it unnerved me for an instant;
but I am all right now. How can I ever thank you?  It was so
wonderful--you did not seem to fear the frightful creature in the
least; yet he was afraid of you. Who are you?"

"He knows me," replied Tarzan, grimly--"that is why he fears me."

He was standing facing the girl now and for the first time
he had a chance to look at her squarely and closely. She was very
beautiful--that was undeniable; but Tarzan realized her beauty only
in a subconscious way. It was superficial--it did not color her
soul which must be black as sin. She was German--a German spy. He
hated her and desired only to compass her destruction; but he would
choose the manner so that it would work most grievously against
the enemy cause.

He saw her naked breasts where Numa had torn her clothing from her
and dangling there against the soft, white flesh he saw that which
brought a sudden scowl of surprise and anger to his face--the
diamond-studded, golden locket of his youth--the love token that
had been stolen from the breast of his mate by Schneider, the Hun.
The girl saw the scowl but did not interpret it correctly. Tarzan
grasped her roughly by the arm.

"Where did you get this?" he demanded, as he tore the bauble from
her.

The girl drew herself to her full height. "Take your hand from me,"
she demanded, but the ape-man paid no attention to her words, only
seizing her more forcibly.

"Answer me!" he snapped. "Where did you get this?"

"What is it to you?" she countered.

"It is mine," he replied. "Tell me who gave it to you or I will
throw you back to Numa."

"You would do that?" she asked.

"Why not?" he queried. "You are a spy and spies must die if they
are caught."

"You were going to kill me, then?"

"I was going to take you to headquarters. They would dispose of
you there; but Numa can do it quite as effectively.  Which do you
prefer?"

"Hauptmann Fritz Schneider gave it to me," she said.

"Headquarters it will be then," said Tarzan. "Come!" The girl
moved at his side through the bush and all the time her mind worked
quickly. They were moving east, which suited her, and as long as
they continued to move east she was glad to have the protection
of the great, white savage. She speculated much upon the fact that
her pistol still swung at her hip. The man must be mad not to take
it from her.

"What makes you think I am a spy?" she asked after a long silence.

"I saw you at German headquarters," he replied, "and then again
inside the British lines."

She could not let him take her back to them. She must reach
Wilhelmstal at once and she was determined to do so even if she
must have recourse to her pistol. She cast a side glance at the
tall figure. What a magnificent creature! But yet he was a brute
who would kill her or have her killed if she did not slay him. And
the locket! She must have that back--it must not fail to reach
Wilhelmstal. Tarzan was now a foot or two ahead of her as the path
was very narrow. Cautiously she drew her pistol. A single shot would
suffice and he was so close that she could not miss. As she figured
it all out her eyes rested on the brown skin with the graceful muscles
rolling beneath it and the perfect limbs and head and the carriage
that a proud king of old might have envied.  A wave of revulsion
for her contemplated act surged through her. No, she could not
do it--yet, she must be free and she must regain possession of
the locket. And then, almost blindly, she swung the weapon up and
struck Tarzan heavily upon the back of the head with its butt. Like
a felled ox he dropped in his tracks.




Chapter VI

Vengeance and Mercy


It was an hour later that Sheeta, the panther, hunting, chanced to
glance upward into the blue sky where his attention was attracted
by Ska, the vulture, circling slowly above the bush a mile away and
downwind. For a long minute the yellow eyes stared intently at the
gruesome bird. They saw Ska dive and rise again to continue his
ominous circling and in these movements their woodcraft read that
which, while obvious to Sheeta, would doubtless have meant nothing
to you or me.

The hunting cat guessed that on the ground beneath Ska was some
living thing of flesh--either a beast feeding upon its kill or a
dying animal that Ska did not yet dare attack. In either event it
might prove meat for Sheeta, and so the wary feline stalked by a
circuitous route, upon soft, padded feet that gave forth no sound,
until the circling aasvogel and his intended prey were upwind. Then,
sniffing each vagrant zephyr, Sheeta, the panther, crept cautiously
forward, nor had he advanced any considerable distance before his
keen nostrils were rewarded with the scent of man--a Tarmangani.

Sheeta paused. He was not a hunter of men. He was young and in his
prime; but always before he had avoided this hated presence. Of
late he had become more accustomed to it with the passing of many
soldiers through his ancient hunting ground, and as the soldiers
had frightened away a great part of the game Sheeta had been wont
to feed upon, the days had been lean, and Sheeta was hungry.

The circling Ska suggested that this Tarmangani might be helpless
and upon the point of dying, else Ska would not have been interested
in him, and so easy prey for Sheeta. With this thought in mind the
cat resumed his stalking. Presently he pushed through the thick
bush and his yellow-green eyes rested gloatingly upon the body of
an almost naked Tarmangani lying face down in a narrow game trail.

Numa, sated, rose from the carcass of Bertha Kircher's horse and
seized the partially devoured body by the neck and dragged it into
the bush; then he started east toward the lair where he had left
his mate. Being uncomfortably full he was inclined to be sleepy
and far from belligerent. He moved slowly and majestically with no
effort at silence or concealment. The king walked abroad, unafraid.

With an occasional regal glance to right or left he moved along a
narrow game trail until at a turn he came to a sudden stop at what
lay revealed before him--Sheeta, the panther, creeping stealthily
upon the almost naked body of a Tarmangani lying face down in the
deep dust of the pathway.  Numa glared intently at the quiet body
in the dust. Recognition came. It was his Tarmangani. A low growl
of warning rumbled from his throat and Sheeta halted with one paw
upon Tarzan's back and turned suddenly to eye the intruder.

What passed within those savage brains? Who may say?  The panther
seemed debating the wisdom of defending his find, for he growled
horribly as though warning Numa away from the prey. And Numa? Was
the idea of property rights dominating his thoughts? The Tarmangani
was his, or he was the Tarmangani's. Had not the Great White Ape
mastered and subdued him and, too, had he not fed him? Numa recalled
the fear that he had felt of this man-thing and his cruel spear;
but in savage brains fear is more likely to engender respect than
hatred and so Numa found that he respected the creature who had
subdued and mastered him.  He saw Sheeta, upon whom he looked with
contempt, daring to molest the master of the lion. Jealousy and
greed alone might have been sufficient to prompt Numa to drive Sheeta
away, even though the lion was not sufficiently hungry to devour
the flesh that he thus wrested from the lesser cat; but then, too,
there was in the little brain within the massive head a sense of
loyalty, and perhaps this it was that sent Numa quickly forward,
growling, toward the spitting Sheeta.

For a moment the latter stood his ground with arched back and
snarling face, for all the world like a great, spotted tabby.

Numa had not felt like fighting; but the sight of Sheeta daring
to dispute his rights kindled his ferocious brain to sudden fire.
His rounded eyes glared with rage, his undulating tail snapped to
stiff erectness as, with a frightful roar, he charged this presuming
vassal.

It came so suddenly and from so short a distance that Sheeta had
no chance to turn and flee the rush, and so he met it with raking
talons and snapping jaws; but the odds were all against him. To
the larger fangs and the more powerful jaws of his adversary were
added huge talons and the preponderance of the lion's great weight.
At the first clash Sheeta was crushed and, though he deliberately
fell upon his back and drew up his powerful hind legs beneath Numa
with the intention of disemboweling him, the lion forestalled him
and at the same time closed his awful jaws upon Sheeta's throat.

It was soon over. Numa rose, shaking himself, and stood above the
torn and mutilated body of his foe. His own sleek coat was cut and
the red blood trickled down his flank; though it was but a minor
injury, it angered him. He glared down at the dead panther and
then, in a fit of rage, he seized and mauled the body only to drop
it in a moment, lower his head, voice a single terrific roar, and
turn toward the ape-man.

Approaching the still form he sniffed it over from head to foot.
Then he placed a huge paw upon it and turned it over with its face
up. Again he smelled about the body and at last with his rough tongue
licked Tarzan's face. It was then that Tarzan opened his eyes.

Above him towered the huge lion, its hot breath upon his face, its
rough tongue upon his cheek. The ape-man had often been close to
death; but never before so close as this, he thought, for he was
convinced that death was but a matter of seconds. His brain was
still numb from the effects of the blow that had felled him, and
so he did not, for a moment, recognize the lion that stood over
him as the one he had so recently encountered.

Presently, however, recognition dawned upon him and with it
a realization of the astounding fact that Numa did not seem bent
on devouring him--at least not immediately. His position was a
delicate one. The lion stood astraddle Tarzan with his front paws.
The ape-man could not rise, therefore, without pushing the lion away
and whether Numa would tolerate being pushed was an open question.
Too, the beast might consider him already dead and any movement that
indicated the contrary was true would, in all likelihood, arouse
the killing instinct of the man-eater.

But Tarzan was tiring of the situation. He was in no mood to lie
there forever, especially when he contemplated the fact that the
girl spy who had tried to brain him was undoubtedly escaping as
rapidly as possible.

Numa was looking right into his eyes now evidently aware that he was
alive. Presently the lion cocked his head on one side and whined.
Tarzan knew the note, and he knew that it spelled neither rage nor
hunger, and then he risked all on a single throw, encouraged by
that low whine.

"Move, Numa!" he commanded and placing a palm against the tawny
shoulder he pushed the lion aside. Then he rose and with a hand
on his hunting knife awaited that which might follow. It was then
that his eyes fell for the first time on the torn body of Sheeta.
He looked from the dead cat to the live one and saw the marks of
conflict upon the latter, too, and in an instant realized something
of what had happened--Numa had saved him from the panther!

It seemed incredible and yet the evidence pointed clearly to the
fact. He turned toward the lion and without fear approached and
examined his wounds which he found superficial, and as Tarzan knelt
beside him Numa rubbed an itching ear against the naked, brown
shoulder. Then the ape-man stroked the great head, picked up his
spear, and looked about for the trail of the girl. This he soon
found leading toward the east, and as he set out upon it something
prompted him to feel for the locket he had hung about his neck. It
was gone!

No trace of anger was apparent upon the ape-man's face unless it
was a slight tightening of the jaws; but he put his hand ruefully
to the back of his head where a bump marked the place where the
girl had struck him and a moment later a half-smile played across
his lips. He could not help but admit that she had tricked him
neatly, and that it must have taken nerve to do the thing she did
and to set out armed only with a pistol through the trackless waste
that lay between them and the railway and beyond into the hills
where Wilhelmstal lies.

Tarzan admired courage. He was big enough to admit it and admire
it even in a German spy, but he saw that in this case it only added
to her resourcefulness and made her all the more dangerous and the
necessity for putting her out of the way paramount. He hoped to
overtake her before she reached Wilhelmstal and so he set out at
the swinging trot that he could hold for hours at a stretch without
apparent fatigue.

That the girl could hope to reach the town on foot in less than two
days seemed improbable, for it was a good thirty miles and part
of it hilly. Even as the thought crossed his mind he heard the
whistle of a locomotive to the east and knew that the railway was
in operation again after a shutdown of several days. If the train
was going south the girl would signal it if she had reached the
right of way. His keen ears caught the whining of brake shoes on
wheels and a few minutes later the signal blast for brakes off.
The train had stopped and started again and, as it gained headway
and greater distance, Tarzan could tell from the direction of the
sound that it was moving south.

The ape-man followed the trail to the railway where it ended
abruptly on the west side of the track, showing that the girl had
boarded the train, just as he thought. There was nothing now but
to follow on to Wilhelmstal, where he hoped to find Captain Fritz
Schneider, as well as the girl, and to recover his diamond-studded
locket.

It was dark when Tarzan reached the little hill town of Wilhelmstal.
He loitered on the outskirts, getting his bearings and trying to
determine how an almost naked white man might explore the village
without arousing suspicion. There were many soldiers about and
the town was under guard, for he could see a lone sentinel walking
his post scarce a hundred yards from him. To elude this one would
not be difficult; but to enter the village and search it would be
practically impossible, garbed, or un-garbed, as he was.

Creeping forward, taking advantage of every cover, lying flat and
motionless when the sentry's face was toward him, the ape-man at
last reached the sheltering shadows of an outhouse just inside the
lines. From there he moved stealthily from building to building
until at last he was discovered by a large dog in the rear of one of
the bungalows. The brute came slowly toward him, growling. Tarzan
stood motionless beside a tree. He could see a light in the bungalow
and uniformed men moving about and he hoped that the dog would not
bark. He did not; but he growled more savagely and, just at the
moment that the rear door of the bungalow opened and a man stepped
out, the animal charged.

He was a large dog, as large as Dango, the hyena, and he charged
with all the vicious impetuosity of Numa, the lion.  As he came
Tarzan knelt and the dog shot through the air for his throat; but
he was dealing with no man now and he found his quickness more
than matched by the quickness of the Tarmangani. His teeth never
reached the soft flesh--strong fingers, fingers of steel, seized
his neck. He voiced a single startled yelp and clawed at the naked
breast before him with his talons; but he was powerless. The mighty
fingers closed upon his throat; the man rose, snapped the clawing
body once, and cast it aside. At the same time a voice from the
open bungalow door called: "Simba!"

There was no response. Repeating the call the man descended the
steps and advanced toward the tree. In the light from the doorway
Tarzan could see that he was a tall, broad-shouldered man in the
uniform of a German officer. The ape-man withdrew into the shadow
of the tree's stem. The man came closer, still calling the dog--he
did not see the savage beast, crouching now in the shadow, awaiting
him. When he had approached within ten feet of the Tarmangani,
Tarzan leaped upon him--as Sabor springs to the kill, so sprang the
ape-man. The momentum and weight of his body hurled the German to
the ground, powerful fingers prevented an outcry and, though the
officer struggled, he had no chance and a moment later lay dead
beside the body of the dog.

As Tarzan stood for a moment looking down upon his kill and regretting
that he could not risk voicing his beloved victory cry, the sight
of the uniform suggested a means whereby he might pass to and
fro through Wilhelmstal with the minimum chance of detection. Ten
minutes later a tall, broad-shouldered officer stepped from the
yard of the bungalow leaving behind him the corpses of a dog and
a naked man.

He walked boldly along the little street and those who passed him
could not guess that beneath Imperial Germany's uniform beat a
savage heart that pulsed with implacable hatred for the Hun. Tarzan's
first concern was to locate the hotel, for here he guessed he would
find the girl, and where the girl was doubtless would be Hauptmann
Fritz Schneider, who was either her confederate, her sweetheart,
or both, and there, too, would be Tarzan's precious locket.

He found the hotel at last, a low, two-storied building with
a veranda. There were lights on both floors and people, mostly
officers, could be seen within. The ape-man considered entering
and inquiring for those he sought; but his better judgment finally
prompted him to reconnoiter first. Passing around the building he
looked into all the lighted rooms on the first floor and, seeing
neither of those for whom he had come, he swung lightly to the roof
of the veranda and continued his investigations through windows of
the second story.

At one corner of the hotel in a rear room the blinds were drawn;
but he heard voices within and once he saw a figure silhouetted
momentarily against the blind. It appeared to be the figure
of a woman; but it was gone so quickly that he could not be sure.
Tarzan crept close to the window and listened.  Yes, there was a
woman there and a man--he heard distinctly the tones of their voices
although he could overhear no words, as they seemed to be whispering.

The adjoining room was dark. Tarzan tried the window and found it
unlatched. All was quiet within. He raised the sash and listened
again--still silence. Placing a leg over the sill he slipped within
and hurriedly glanced about. The room was vacant. Crossing to the
door he opened it and looked out into the hall. There was no one
there, either, and he stepped out and approached the door of the
adjoining room where the man and woman were.

Pressing close to the door he listened. Now he distinguished
words, for the two had raised their voices as though in argument.
The woman was speaking.

"I have brought the locket," she said, "as was agreed upon between
you and General Kraut, as my identification. I carry no other
credentials. This was to be enough. You have nothing to do but give
me the papers and let me go."

The man replied in so low a tone that Tarzan could not catch the
words and then the woman spoke again--a note of scorn and perhaps
a little of fear in her voice.

"You would not dare, Hauptmann Schneider," she said, and then: "Do
not touch me! Take your hands from me!"

It was then that Tarzan of the Apes opened the door and stepped
into the room. What he saw was a huge, bull-necked German officer
with one arm about the waist of Fraulein Bertha Kircher and a hand
upon her forehead pushing her head back as he tried to kiss her
on the mouth. The girl was struggling against the great brute; but
her efforts were futile.  Slowly the man's lips were coming closer
to hers and slowly, step by step, she was being carried backward.

Schneider heard the noise of the opening and closing door behind
him and turned. At sight of this strange officer he dropped the
girl and straightened up.

"What is the meaning of this intrusion, Lieutenant?" he demanded,
noting the other's epaulettes. "Leave the room at once."

Tarzan made no articulate reply; but the two there with him heard
a low growl break from those firm lips--a growl that sent a shudder
through the frame of the girl and brought a pallor to the red face
of the Hun and his hand to his pistol but even as he drew his weapon
it was wrested from him and hurled through the blind and window to
the yard beyond.  Then Tarzan backed against the door and slowly
removed the uniform coat.

"You are Hauptmann Schneider," he said to the German.

"What of it?" growled the latter.

"I am Tarzan of the Apes," replied the ape-man. "Now you know why
I intrude."

The two before him saw that he was naked beneath the coat which he
threw upon the floor and then he slipped quickly from the trousers
and stood there clothed only in his loin cloth.  The girl had
recognized him by this time, too.

"Take your hand off that pistol," Tarzan admonished her.  Her hand
dropped at her side. "Now come here!"

She approached and Tarzan removed the weapon and hurled it after
the other. At the mention of his name Tarzan had noted the sickly
pallor that overspread the features of the Hun. At last he had found
the right man. At last his mate would be partially avenged--never
could she be entirely avenged. Life was too short and there were
too many Germans.

"What do you want of me?" demanded Schneider.

"You are going to pay the price for the thing you did at the little
bungalow in the Waziri country," replied the ape-man.

Schneider commenced to bluster and threaten. Tarzan turned the key
in the lock of the door and hurled the former through the window
after the pistols. Then he turned to the girl. "Keep out of the
way," he said in a low voice. "Tarzan of the Apes is going to kill."

The Hun ceased blustering and began to plead. "I have a wife and
children at home," he cried. "I have done nothing, I--"

"You are going to die as befits your kind," said Tarzan, "with blood
on your hands and a lie on your lips." He started across the room
toward the burly Hauptmann. Schneider was a large and powerful
man--about the height of the ape-man but much heavier. He saw that
neither threats nor pleas would avail him and so he prepared to
fight as a cornered rat fights for its life with all the maniacal
rage, cunning, and ferocity that the first law of nature imparts
to many beasts.

Lowering his bull head he charged for the ape-man and in the center
of the floor the two clinched. There they stood locked and swaying
for a moment until Tarzan succeeded in forcing his antagonist backward
over a table which crashed to the floor, splintered by the weight
of the two heavy bodies.

The girl stood watching the battle with wide eyes. She saw the two
men rolling hither and thither across the floor and she heard with
horror the low growls that came from the lips of the naked giant.
Schneider was trying to reach his foe's throat with his fingers
while, horror of horrors, Bertha Kircher could see that the other
was searching for the German's jugular with his teeth!

Schneider seemed to realize this too, for he redoubled his efforts
to escape and finally succeeded in rolling over on top of the ape-man
and breaking away. Leaping to his feet he ran for the window; but
the ape-man was too quick for him and before he could leap through
the sash a heavy hand fell upon his shoulder and he was jerked
back and hurled across the room to the opposite wall. There Tarzan
followed him, and once again they locked, dealing each other terrific
blows, until Schneider in a piercing voice screamed, "Kamerad!
Kamerad!"

Tarzan grasped the man by the throat and drew his hunting knife.
Schneider's back was against the wall so that though his knees
wobbled he was held erect by the ape-man. Tarzan brought the sharp
point to the lower part of the German's abdomen.

"Thus you slew my mate," he hissed in a terrible voice.  "Thus
shall you die!"

The girl staggered forward. "Oh, God, no!" she cried.  "Not that.
You are too brave--you cannot be such a beast as that!"

Tarzan turned at her. "No," he said, "you are right, I cannot do
it--I am no German," and he raised the point of his blade and sunk
it deep into the putrid heart of Hauptmann Fritz Schneider, putting
a bloody period to the Hun's last gasping cry: "I did not do it!
She is not--"

Then Tarzan turned toward the girl and held out his hand.  "Give
me my locket," he said.

She pointed toward the dead officer. "He has it." Tarzan searched
him and found the trinket. "Now you may give me the papers," he said
to the girl, and without a word she handed him a folded document.

For a long time he stood looking at her before ho spoke again.

"I came for you, too," he said. "It would be difficult to take you
back from here and so I was going to kill you, as I have sworn to
kill all your kind; but you were right when you said that I was
not such a beast as that slayer of women. I could not slay him as
he slew mine, nor can I slay you, who are a woman."

He crossed to the window, raised the sash and an instant later he
had stepped out and disappeared into the night. And then Fraulein
Bertha Kircher stepped quickly to the corpse upon the floor, slipped
her hand inside the blouse and drew forth a little sheaf of papers
which she tucked into her waist before she went to the window and
called for help.




Chapter VII

When Blood Told


Tarzan of the Apes was disgusted. He had had the German spy, Bertha
Kircher, in his power and had left her unscathed. It is true that he
had slain Hauptmann Fritz Schneider, that Underlieutenant von Goss
had died at his hands, and that he had otherwise wreaked vengeance
upon the men of the German company who had murdered, pillaged, and
raped at Tarzan's bungalow in the Waziri country. There was still
another officer to be accounted for, but him he could not find.
It was Lieutenant Obergatz he still sought, though vainly, for at
last he learned that the man had been sent upon some special mission,
whether in Africa or back to Europe Tarzan's informant either did
not know or would not divulge.

But the fact that he had permitted sentiment to stay his hand when
he might so easily have put Bertha Kircher out of the way in the
hotel at Wilhelmstal that night rankled in the ape-man's bosom.
He was shamed by his weakness, and when he had handed the paper
she had given him to the British chief of staff, even though
the information it contained permitted the British to frustrate a
German flank attack, he was still much dissatisfied with himself.
And possibly the root of this dissatisfaction lay in the fact that
he realized that were he again to have the same opportunity he
would still find it as impossible to slay a woman as it had been
in Wilhelmstal that night.

Tarzan blamed this weakness, as he considered it, upon his association
with the effeminizing influences of civilization, for in the bottom
of his savage heart he held in contempt both civilization and its
representatives--the men and women of the civilized countries of
the world. Always was he comparing their weaknesses, their vices,
their hypocrisies, and their little vanities with the open,
primitive ways of his ferocious jungle mates, and all the while
there battled in that same big heart with these forces another mighty
force--Tarzan's love and loyalty for his friends of the civilized
world.

The ape-man, reared as he had been by savage beasts amid savage
beasts, was slow to make friends. Acquaintances he numbered by the
hundreds; but of friends he had few. These few he would have died
for as, doubtless, they would have died for him; but there were
none of these fighting with the British forces in East Africa, and
so, sickened and disgusted by the sight of man waging his cruel
and inhuman warfare, Tarzan determined to heed the insistent call
of the remote jungle of his youth, for the Germans were now on the
run and the war in East Africa was so nearly over that he realized
that his further services would be of negligible value.

Never regularly sworn into the service of the King, he was under
no obligation to remain now that the moral obligation had been
removed, and so it was that he disappeared from the British camp
as mysteriously as he had appeared a few months before.

More than once had Tarzan reverted to the primitive only to return
again to civilization through love for his mate; but now that she
was gone he felt that this time he had definitely departed forever
from the haunts of man, and that he should live and die a beast
among beasts even as he had been from infancy to maturity.

Between him and his destination lay a trackless wilderness of untouched
primeval savagery where, doubtless in many spots, his would be the
first human foot to touch the virgin turf. Nor did this prospect
dismay the Tarmangani--rather was it an urge and an inducement, for
rich in his veins flowed that noble strain of blood that has made
most of the earth's surface habitable for man.

The question of food and water that would have risen paramount in
the mind of an ordinary man contemplating such an excursion gave
Tarzan little concern. The wilderness was his natural habitat
and woodcraft as inherent to him as breathing. Like other jungle
animals he could scent water from a great distance and, where you
or I might die of thirst, the ape-man would unerringly select the
exact spot at which to dig and find water.

For several days Tarzan traversed a country rich in game
and watercourses. He moved slowly, hunting and fishing, or again
fraternizing or quarreling with the other savage denizens of
the jungle. Now it was little Manu, the monkey, who chattered and
scolded at the mighty Tarmangani and in the next breath warned him
that Histah, the snake, lay coiled in the long grass just ahead.
Of Manu Tarzan inquired concerning the great apes--the Mangani--and
was told that few inhabited this part of the jungle, and that even
these were hunting farther to the north this season of the year.

"But there is Bolgani," said Manu. "Would you like to see Bolgani?"

Manu's tone was sneering, and Tarzan knew that it was because little
Manu thought all creatures feared mighty Bolgani, the gorilla.
Tarzan arched his great chest and struck it with a clinched fist.
"I am Tarzan," he cried. "While Tarzan was yet a balu he slew a
Bolgani. Tarzan seeks the Mangani, who are his brothers, but Bolgani
he does not seek, so let Bolgani keep from the path of Tarzan."

Little Manu, the monkey, was much impressed, for the way of the
jungle is to boast and to believe. It was then that he condescended
to tell Tarzan more of the Mangani.

"They go there and there and there," he said, making a wide sweep
with a brown hand first toward the north, then west, and then south
again. "For there," and he pointed due west, "is much hunting; but
between lies a great place where there is no food and no water,
so they must go that way," and again he swung his hand through the
half-circle that explained to Tarzan the great detour the apes made
to come to their hunting ground to the west.

That was all right for the Mangani, who are lazy and do not care to
move rapidly; but for Tarzan the straight road would be the best.
He would cross the dry country and come to the good hunting in a third
of the time that it would take to go far to the north and circle
back again. And so it was that he continued on toward the west, and
crossing a range of low mountains came in sight of a broad plateau,
rock strewn and desolate. Far in the distance he saw another range
of mountains beyond which he felt must lie the hunting ground of
the Mangani. There he would join them and remain for a while before
continuing on toward the coast and the little cabin that his father
had built beside the land-locked harbor at the jungle's edge.

Tarzan was full of plans. He would rebuild and enlarge the cabin
of his birth, constructing storage houses where he would make the
apes lay away food when it was plenty against the times that were
lean--a thing no ape ever had dreamed of doing. And the tribe would
remain always in the locality and he would be king again as he had
in the past. He would try to teach them some of the better things
that he had learned from man, yet knowing the ape-mind as only
Tarzan could, he feared that his labors would be for naught.

The ape-man found the country he was crossing rough in the extreme,
the roughest he ever had encountered. The plateau was cut by frequent
canyons the passage of which often entailed hours of wearing effort.
The vegetation was sparse and of a faded brown color that lent to
the whole landscape a most depressing aspect. Great rocks were strewn
in every direction as far as the eye could see, lying partially
embedded in an impalpable dust that rose in clouds about him at
every step. The sun beat down mercilessly out of a cloudless sky.

For a day Tarzan toiled across this now hateful land and at the
going down of the sun the distant mountains to the west seemed no
nearer than at morn. Never a sign of living thing had the ape-man
seen, other than Ska, that bird of ill omen, that had followed him
tirelessly since he had entered this parched waste.

No littlest beetle that he might eat had given evidence that life
of any sort existed here, and it was a hungry and thirsty Tarzan who
lay down to rest in the evening. He decided now to push on during
the cool of the night, for he realized that even mighty Tarzan had
his limitations and that where there was no food one could not eat
and where there was no water the greatest woodcraft in the world
could find none. It was a totally new experience to Tarzan to find
so barren and terrible a country in his beloved Africa. Even the
Sahara had its oases; but this frightful world gave no indication
of containing a square foot of hospitable ground.

However, he had no misgivings but that he would fare forth into
the wonder country of which little Manu had told him, though it
was certain that he would do it with a dry skin and an empty belly.
And so he fought on until daylight, when he again felt the need
of rest. He was at the edge of another of those terrible canyons,
the eighth he had crossed, whose precipitous sides would have taxed
to the uttermost the strength of an untired man well fortified by
food and water, and for the first time, as he looked down into the
abyss and then at the opposite side that he must scale, misgivings
began to assail his mind.

He did not fear death--with the memory of his murdered mate still
fresh in his mind he almost courted it, yet strong within him
was that primal instinct of self-preservation--the battling force
of life that would keep him an active contender against the Great
Reaper until, fighting to the very last, he should be overcome by
a superior power.

A shadow swung slowly across the ground beside him, and looking
up, the ape-man saw Ska, the vulture, wheeling a wide circle above
him. The grim and persistent harbinger of evil aroused the man
to renewed determination. He arose and approached the edge of the
canyon, and then, wheeling, with his face turned upward toward the
circling bird of prey, he bellowed forth the challenge of the bull
ape.

"I am Tarzan," he shouted, "Lord of the Jungle. Tarzan of the Apes
is not for Ska, eater of carrion. Go back to the lair of Dango
and feed off the leavings of the hyenas, for Tarzan will leave no
bones for Ska to pick in this empty wilderness of death."

But before he reached the bottom of the canyon he again was forced
to the realization that his great strength was waning, and when he
dropped exhausted at the foot of the cliff and saw before him the
opposite wall that must be scaled, he bared his fighting fangs and
growled. For an hour he lay resting in the cool shade at the foot
of the cliff. All about him reigned utter silence--the silence of
the tomb. No fluttering birds, no humming insects, no scurrying
reptiles relieved the deathlike stillness. This indeed was the
valley of death.  He felt the depressing influence of the horrible
place settling down upon him; but he staggered to his feet, shaking
himself like a great lion, for was he not still Tarzan, mighty
Tarzan of the Apes? Yes, and Tarzan the mighty he would be until
the last throb of that savage heart!

As he crossed the floor of the canyon he saw something lying close
to the base of the side wall he was approaching--something that
stood out in startling contrast to all the surroundings and yet
seemed so much a part and parcel of the somber scene as to suggest
an actor amid the settings of a well-appointed stage, and, as though
to carry out the allegory, the pitiless rays of flaming Kudu topped
the eastern cliff, picking out the thing lying at the foot of the
western wall like a giant spotlight.

And as Tarzan came nearer he saw the bleached skull and bones of
a human being about which were remnants of clothing and articles
of equipment that, as he examined them, filled the ape-man with
curiosity to such an extent that for a time he forgot his own
predicament in contemplation of the remarkable story suggested by
these mute evidences of a tragedy of a time long past.

The bones were in a fair state of preservation and indicated by
their intactness that the flesh had probably been picked from them
by vultures as none was broken; but the pieces of equipment bore
out the suggestion of their great age. In this protected spot where
there were no frosts and evidently but little rainfall, the bones
might have lain for ages without disintegrating, for there were
here no other forces to scatter or disturb them.

Near the skeleton lay a helmet of hammered brass and a corroded
breastplate of steel while at one side was a long, straight sword
in its scabbard and an ancient harquebus. The bones were those of
a large man--a man of wondrous strength and vitality Tarzan knew
he must have been to have penetrated thus far through the dangers
of Africa with such a ponderous yet at the same time futile armament.

The ape-man felt a sense of deep admiration for this nameless
adventurer of a bygone day. What a brute of a man he must have been
and what a glorious tale of battle and kaleidoscopic vicissitudes
of fortune must once have been locked within that whitened skull!
Tarzan stooped to examine the shreds of clothing that still lay
about the bones. Every particle of leather had disappeared, doubtless
eaten by Ska. No boots remained, if the man had worn boots, but
there were several buckles scattered about suggesting that a great
part of his trappings had been of leather, while just beneath the
bones of one hand lay a metal cylinder about eight inches long and
two inches in diameter. As Tarzan picked it up he saw that it had
been heavily lacquered and had withstood the slight ravages of
time so well as to be in as perfect a state of preservation today
as it had been when its owner dropped into his last, long sleep
perhaps centuries ago.

As he examined it he discovered that one end was closed with
a friction cover which a little twisting force soon loosened and
removed, revealing within a roll of parchment which the ape-man
removed and opened, disclosing a number of age-yellowed sheets
closely written upon in a fine hand in a language which he guessed
to be Spanish but which he could not decipher. Upon the last sheet
was a roughly drawn map with numerous reference points marked upon
it, all unintelligible to Tarzan, who, after a brief examination
of the papers, returned them to their metal case, replaced the top
and was about to toss the little cylinder to the ground beside the
mute remains of its former possessor when some whim of curiosity
unsatisfied prompted him to slip it into the quiver with his arrows,
though as he did so it was with the grim thought that possibly
centuries hence it might again come to the sight of man beside his
own bleached bones.

And then, with a parting glance at the ancient skeleton, he turned
to the task of ascending the western wall of the canyon.  Slowly
and with many rests he dragged his weakening body upwards. Again and
again he slipped back from sheer exhaustion and would have fallen
to the floor of the canyon but for merest chance. How long it took
him to scale that frightful wall he could not have told, and when
at last he dragged himself over the top it was to lie weak and
gasping, too spent to rise or even to move a few inches farther
from the perilous edge of the chasm.

At last he arose, very slowly and with evident effort gaining his
knees first and then staggering to his feet, yet his indomitable
will was evidenced by a sudden straightening of his shoulders and
a determined shake of his head as he lurched forward on unsteady
legs to take up his valiant fight for survival. Ahead he scanned
the rough landscape for sign of another canyon which he knew would
spell inevitable doom.  The western hills rose closer now though
weirdly unreal as they seemed to dance in the sunlight as though
mocking him with their nearness at the moment that exhaustion was
about to render them forever unattainable.

Beyond them he knew must be the fertile hunting grounds of which Manu
had told. Even if no canyon intervened, his chances of surmounting
even low hills seemed remote should he have the fortune to reach
their base; but with another canyon hope was dead. Above them Ska
still circled, and it seemed to the ape-man that the ill-omened
bird hovered ever lower and lower as though reading in that failing
gait the nearing of the end, and through cracked lips Tarzan growled
out his defiance.

Mile after mile Tarzan of the Apes put slowly behind him, borne up
by sheer force of will where a lesser man would have lain down to
die and rest forever tired muscles whose every move was an agony of
effort; but at last his progress became practically mechanical--he
staggered on with a dazed mind that reacted numbly to a single
urge--on, on, on! The hills were now but a dim, ill-defined blur
ahead. Sometimes he forgot that they were hills, and again he
wondered vaguely why he must go on forever through all this torture
endeavoring to overtake them--the fleeing, elusive hills. Presently
he began to hate them and there formed within his half-delirious
brain the hallucination that the hills were German hills, that they
had slain someone dear to him, whom he could never quite recall,
and that he was pursuing to slay them.

This idea, growing, appeared to give him strength--a new and
revivifying purpose--so that for a time he no longer staggered; but
went forward steadily with head erect. Once he stumbled and fell,
and when he tried to rise he found that he could not--that his
strength was so far gone that he could only crawl forward on his
hands and knees for a few yards and then sink down again to rest.

It was during one of these frequent periods of utter exhaustion
that he heard the flap of dismal wings close above him.  With his
remaining strength he turned himself over on his back to see Ska
wheel quickly upward. With the sight Tarzan's mind cleared for a
while.

"Is the end so near as that?" he thought. "Does Ska know that I am
so near gone that he dares come down and perch upon my carcass?"
And even then a grim smile touched those swollen lips as into the
savage mind came a sudden thought--the cunning of the wild beast
at bay. Closing his eyes he threw a forearm across them to protect
them from Ska's powerful beak and then he lay very still and waited.

It was restful lying there, for the sun was now obscured by clouds
and Tarzan was very tired. He feared that he might sleep and something
told him that if he did he would never awaken, and so he concentrated
all his remaining powers upon the one thought of remaining awake.
Not a muscle moved--to Ska, circling above, it became evident that
the end had come--that at last he should be rewarded for his long
vigil.

Circling slowly he dropped closer and closer to the dying man. Why
did not Tarzan move? Had he indeed been overcome by the sleep of
exhaustion, or was Ska right--had death at last claimed that mighty
body? Was that great, savage heart stilled forever? It is unthinkable.

Ska, filled with suspicions, circled warily. Twice he almost alighted
upon the great, naked breast only to wheel suddenly away; but the
third time his talons touched the brown skin.  It was as though the
contact closed an electric circuit that instantaneously vitalized
the quiet clod that had lain motionless so long. A brown hand swept
downward from the brown forehead and before Ska could raise a wing
in flight he was in the clutches of his intended victim.

Ska fought, but he was no match for even a dying Tarzan, and
a moment later the ape-man's teeth closed upon the carrion-eater.
The flesh was coarse and tough and gave off an unpleasant odor and
a worse taste; but it was food and the blood was drink and Tarzan
only an ape at heart and a dying ape into the bargain--dying of
starvation and thirst.

Even mentally weakened as he was the ape-man was still master
of his appetite and so he ate but sparingly, saving the rest, and
then, feeling that he now could do so safely, he turned upon his
side and slept.

Rain, beating heavily upon his body, awakened him and sitting up he
cupped his hands and caught the precious drops which he transferred
to his parched throat. Only a little he got at a time; but that
was best. The few mouthfuls of Ska that he had eaten, together with
the blood and rain water and the sleep had refreshed him greatly
and put new strength into his tired muscles.

Now he could see the hills again and they were close and, though
there was no sun, the world looked bright and cheerful, for Tarzan
knew that he was saved. The bird that would have devoured him, and
the providential rain, had saved him at the very moment that death
seemed inevitable.

Again partaking of a few mouthfuls of the unsavory flesh of Ska,
the vulture, the ape-man arose with something of his old force
and set out with steady gait toward the hills of promise rising
alluringly ahead. Darkness fell before he reached them; but he
kept on until he felt the steeply rising ground that proclaimed
his arrival at the base of the hills proper, and then he lay down
and waited until morning should reveal the easiest passage to the
land beyond. The rain had ceased, but the sky still was overcast
so that even his keen eyes could not penetrate the darkness farther
than a few feet. And there he slept, after eating again of what
remained of Ska, until the morning sun awakened him with a new
sense of strength and well-being.

And so at last he came through the hills out of the valley of death
into a land of park-like beauty, rich in game. Below him lay a deep
valley through the center of which dense jungle vegetation marked
the course of a river beyond which a primeval forest extended
for miles to terminate at last at the foot of lofty, snow-capped
mountains. It was a land that Tarzan never had looked upon before,
nor was it likely that the foot of another white man ever had
touched it unless, possibly, in some long-gone day the adventurer
whose skeleton he had found bleaching in the canyon had traversed
it.




Chapter VIII

Tarzan and the Great Apes


Three days the ape-man spent in resting and recuperating, eating
fruits and nuts and the smaller animals that were most easily
bagged, and upon the fourth he set out to explore the valley and
search for the great apes. Time was a negligible factor in the
equation of life--it was all the same to Tarzan if he reached the
west coast in a month or a year or three years. All time was his and
all Africa. His was absolute freedom--the last tie that had bound
him to civilization and custom had been severed. He was alone but
he was not exactly lonely. The greater part of his life had been
spent thus, and though there was no other of his kind, he was at
all times surrounded by the jungle peoples for whom familiarity had
bred no contempt within his breast. The least of them interested
him, and, too, there were those with whom he always made friends
easily, and there were his hereditary enemies whose presence gave a
spice to life that might otherwise have become humdrum and monotonous.

And so it was that on the fourth day he set out to explore the
valley and search for his fellow-apes. He had proceeded southward
for a short distance when his nostrils were assailed by the scent
of man, of Gomangani, the black man. There were many of them, and
mixed with their scent was another-that of a she Tarmangani.

Swinging through the trees Tarzan approached the authors of these
disturbing scents. He came warily from the flank, but paying no
attention to the wind, for he knew that man with his dull senses
could apprehend him only through his eyes or ears and then only
when comparatively close. Had he been stalking Numa or Sheeta he
would have circled about until his quarry was upwind from him, thus
taking practically all the advantage up to the very moment that
he came within sight or hearing; but in the stalking of the dull
clod, man, he approached with almost contemptuous indifference,
so that all the jungle about him knew that he was passing--all but
the men he stalked.

From the dense foliage of a great tree he watched them pass--a
disreputable mob of blacks, some garbed in the uniform of German
East African native troops, others wearing a single garment of the
same uniform, while many had reverted to the simple dress of their
forbears--approximating nudity.  There were many black women with
them, laughing and talking as they kept pace with the men, all of
whom were armed with German rifles and equipped with German belts
and ammunition.

There were no white officers there, but it was none the less apparent
to Tarzan that these men were from some German native command,
and he guessed that they had slain their officers and taken to the
jungle with their women, or had stolen some from native villages
through which they must have passed. It was evident that they were
putting as much ground between themselves and the coast as possible
and doubtless were seeking some impenetrable fastness of the vast
interior where they might inaugurate a reign of terror among the
primitively armed inhabitants and by raiding, looting, and rape
grow rich in goods and women at the expense of the district upon
which they settled themselves.

Between two of the black women marched a slender white girl. She
was hatless and with torn and disheveled clothing that had evidently
once been a trim riding habit. Her coat was gone and her waist half
torn from her body. Occasionally and without apparent provocation
one or the other of the Negresses struck or pushed her roughly.
Tarzan watched through half-closed eyes. His first impulse was to
leap among them and bear the girl from their cruel clutches. He had
recognized her immediately and it was because of this fact that he
hesitated.

What was it to Tarzan of the Apes what fate befell this enemy
spy? He had been unable to kill her himself because of an inherent
weakness that would not permit him to lay hands upon a woman, all
of which of course had no bearing upon what others might do to
her. That her fate would now be infinitely more horrible than the
quick and painless death that the ape-man would have meted to her
only interested Tarzan to the extent that the more frightful the
end of a German the more in keeping it would be with what they all
deserved.

And so he let the blacks pass with Fraulein Bertha Kircher in their
midst, or at least until the last straggling warrior suggested to
his mind the pleasures of black-baiting--an amusement and a sport
in which he had grown ever more proficient since that long-gone day
when Kulonga, the son of Mbonga, the chief, had cast his unfortunate
spear at Kala, the ape-man's foster mother.

The last man, who must have stopped for some purpose, was fully a
quarter of a mile in rear of the party. He was hurrying to catch
up when Tarzan saw him, and as he passed beneath the tree in which
the ape-man perched above the trail, a silent noose dropped deftly
about his neck. The main body still was in plain sight, and as the
frightened man voiced a piercing shriek of terror, they looked back
to see his body rise as though by magic straight into the air and
disappear amidst the leafy foliage above.

For a moment the blacks stood paralyzed by astonishment and fear;
but presently the burly sergeant, Usanga, who led them, started
back along the trail at a run, calling to the others to follow
him. Loading their guns as they came the blacks ran to succor their
fellow, and at Usanga's command they spread into a thin line that
presently entirely surrounded the tree into which their comrade
had vanished.

Usanga called but received no reply; then he advanced slowly with
rifle at the ready, peering up into the tree. He could see no
one--nothing. The circle closed in until fifty blacks were searching
among the branches with their keen eyes. What had become of their
fellow? They had seen him rise into the tree and since then many
eyes had been fastened upon the spot, yet there was no sign of him.
One, more venturesome than his fellows, volunteered to climb into
the tree and investigate. He was gone but a minute or two and
when he dropped to earth again he swore that there was no sign of
a creature there.

Perplexed, and by this time a bit awed, the blacks drew slowly
away from the spot and with many backward glances and less laughing
continued upon their journey until, when about a mile beyond the
spot at which their fellow had disappeared, those in the lead saw
him peering from behind a tree at one side of the trail just in
front of them. With shouts to their companions that he had been
found they ran forwards; but those who were first to reach the
tree stopped suddenly and shrank back, their eyes rolling fearfully
first in one direction and then in another as though they expected
some nameless horror to leap out upon them.

Nor was their terror without foundation. Impaled upon the end of
a broken branch the head of their companion was propped behind the
tree so that it appeared to be looking out at them from the opposite
side of the bole.

It was then that many wished to turn back, arguing that they
had offended some demon of the wood upon whose preserve they had
trespassed; but Usanga refused to listen to them, assuring them
that inevitable torture and death awaited them should they return
and fall again into the hands of their cruel German masters. At
last his reasoning prevailed to the end that a much-subdued and
terrified band moved in a compact mass, like a drove of sheep,
forward through the valley and there were no stragglers.

It is a happy characteristic of the Negro race, which they hold
in common with little children, that their spirits seldom remain
depressed for a considerable length of time after the immediate
cause of depression is removed, and so it was that in half an hour
Usanga's band was again beginning to take on to some extent its
former appearance of carefree lightheartedness. Thus were the heavy
clouds of fear slowly dissipating when a turn in the trail brought
them suddenly upon the headless body of their erstwhile companion
lying directly in their path, and they were again plunged into the
depth of fear and gloomy forebodings.

So utterly inexplicable and uncanny had the entire occurrence been
that there was not a one of them who could find a ray of comfort
penetrating the dead blackness of its ominous portent. What had
happened to one of their number each conceived as being a wholly
possible fate for himself--in fact quite his probable fate. If such
a thing could happen in broad daylight what frightful thing might
not fall to their lot when night had enshrouded them in her mantle
of darkness. They trembled in anticipation.

The white girl in their midst was no less mystified than they; but
far less moved, since sudden death was the most merciful fate to
which she might now look forward. So far she had been subjected
to nothing worse than the petty cruelties of the women, while, on
the other hand, it had alone been the presence of the women that
had saved her from worse treatment at the hands of some of the
men--notably the brutal, black sergeant, Usanga. His own woman
was of the party--a veritable giantess, a virago of the first
magnitude--and she was evidently the only thing in the world of
which Usanga stood in awe. Even though she was particularly cruel
to the young woman, the latter believed that she was her sole
protection from the degraded black tyrant.

Late in the afternoon the band came upon a small palisaded village
of thatched huts set in a clearing in the jungle close beside
a placid river. At their approach the villagers came pouring out,
and Usanga advanced with two of his warriors to palaver with the
chief. The experiences of the day had so shaken the nerves of the
black sergeant that he was ready to treat with these people rather
than take their village by force of arms, as would ordinarily have
been his preference; but now a vague conviction influenced him
that there watched over this part of the jungle a powerful demon
who wielded miraculous power for evil against those who offended
him. First Usanga would learn how these villagers stood with this
savage god and if they had his good will Usanga would be most
careful to treat them with kindness and respect.

At the palaver it developed that the village chief had food,
goats, and fowl which he would be glad to dispose of for a proper
consideration; but as the consideration would have meant parting
with precious rifles and ammunition, or the very clothing from their
backs, Usanga began to see that after all it might be forced upon
him to wage war to obtain food.

A happy solution was arrived at by a suggestion of one of his
men--that the soldiers go forth the following day and hunt for the
villagers, bringing them in so much fresh meat in return for their
hospitality. This the chief agreed to, stipulating the kind and
quantity of game to be paid in return for flour, goats, and fowl,
and a certain number of huts that were to be turned over to the
visitors. The details having been settled after an hour or more
of that bickering argument of which the native African is so fond,
the newcomers entered the village where they were assigned to huts.

Bertha Kircher found herself alone in a small hut close to the palisade
at the far end of the village street, and though she was neither
bound nor guarded, she was assured by Usanga that she could not
escape the village without running into almost certain death in the
jungle, which the villagers assured them was infested by lions of
great size and ferocity. "Be good to Usanga," he concluded, "and
no harm will befall you. I will come again to see you after the
others are asleep. Let us be friends."

As the brute left her the girl's frame was racked by a convulsive
shudder as she sank to the floor of the hut and covered her face
with her hands. She realized now why the women had not been left
to guard her. It was the work of the cunning Usanga, but would not
his woman suspect something of his intentions? She was no fool and,
further, being imbued with insane jealousy she was ever looking
for some overt act upon the part of her ebon lord. Bertha Kircher
felt that only she might save her and that she would save her if
word could be but gotten to her. But how?

Left alone and away from the eyes of her captors for the first time
since the previous night, the girl immediately took advantage of
the opportunity to assure herself that the papers she had taken
from the body of Hauptmann Fritz Schneider were still safely sewn
inside one of her undergarments.

Alas! Of what value could they now ever be to her beloved country?
But habit and loyalty were so strong within her that she still clung
to the determined hope of eventually delivering the little packet
to her chief.

The natives seemed to have forgotten her existence--no one came
near the hut, not even to bring her food. She could hear them at
the other end of the village laughing and yelling and knew that
they were celebrating with food and native beer--knowledge which
only increased her apprehension. To be prisoner in a native village
in the very heart of an unexplored region of Central Africa--the
only white woman among a band of drunken Negroes! The very thought
appalled her.  Yet there was a slight promise in the fact that she
had so far been unmolested--the promise that they might, indeed,
have forgotten her and that soon they might become so hopelessly
drunk as to be harmless.

Darkness had fallen and still no one came. The girl wondered if
she dared venture forth in search of Naratu, Usanga's woman, for
Usanga might not forget that he had promised to return. No one was
near as she stepped out of the hut and made her way toward the part
of the village where the revelers were making merry about a fire.
As she approached she saw the villagers and their guests squatting
in a large circle about the blaze before which a half-dozen naked
warriors leaped and bent and stamped in some grotesque dance.
Pots of food and gourds of drink were being passed about among
the audience. Dirty hands were plunged into the food pots and the
captured portions devoured so greedily that one might have thought
the entire community had been upon the point of starvation. The
gourds they held to their lips until the beer ran down their chins
and the vessels were wrested from them by greedy neighbors. The
drink had now begun to take noticeable effect upon most of them,
with the result that they were beginning to give themselves up to
utter and licentious abandon.

As the girl came nearer, keeping in the shadow of the huts, looking
for Naratu she was suddenly discovered by one upon the edge of the
crowd--a huge woman, who rose, shrieking, and came toward her. From
her aspect the white girl thought that the woman meant literally
to tear her to pieces. So utterly wanton and uncalled-for was the
attack that it found the girl entirely unprepared, and what would
have happened had not a warrior interfered may only be guessed.
And then Usanga, noting the interruption, came lurching forward to
question her.

"What do you want," he cried, "food and drink? Come with me!" and
he threw an arm about her and dragged her toward the circle.

"No!" she cried, "I want Naratu. Where is Naratu?"

This seemed to sober the black for a moment as though he
had temporarily forgotten his better half. He cast quick, fearful
glances about, and then, evidently assured that Naratu had noticed
nothing, he ordered the warrior who was still holding the infuriated
black woman from the white girl to take the latter back to her hut
and to remain there on guard over her.

First appropriating a gourd of beer for himself the warrior
motioned the girl to precede him, and thus guarded she returned to
her hut, the fellow squatting down just outside the doorway, where
he confined his attentions for some time to the gourd.

Bertha Kircher sat down at the far side of the hut awaiting she
knew not what impending fate. She could not sleep so filled was her
mind with wild schemes of escape though each new one must always be
discarded as impractical. Half an hour after the warrior had returned
her to her prison he rose and entered the hut, where he tried to
engage in conversation with her. Groping across the interior he
leaned his short spear against the wall and sat down beside her,
and as he talked he edged closer and closer until at last he could
reach out and touch her. Shrinking, she drew away.

"Do not touch me!" she cried. "I will tell Usanga if you do not
leave me alone, and you know what he will do to you."

The man only laughed drunkenly, and, reaching out his hand, grabbed
her arm and dragged her toward him. She fought and cried aloud for
Usanga and at the same instant the entrance to the hut was darkened
by the form of a man.

"What is the matter?" shouted the newcomer in the deep tones that
the girl recognized as belonging to the black sergeant. He had
come, but would she be any better off? She knew that she would not
unless she could play upon Usanga's fear of his woman.

When Usanga found what had happened he kicked the warrior out of
the hut and bade him begone, and when the fellow had disappeared,
muttering and grumbling, the sergeant approached the white girl. He
was very drunk, so drunk that several times she succeeded in eluding
him and twice she pushed him so violently away that he stumbled
and fell.

Finally he became enraged and rushing upon her, seized her in his
long, apelike arms. Striking at his face with clenched fists she
tried to protect herself and drive him away. She threatened him
with the wrath of Naratu, and at that he changed his tactics and
began to plead, and as he argued with her, promising her safety
and eventual freedom, the warrior he had kicked out of the hut made
his staggering way to the hut occupied by Naratu.

Usanga finding that pleas and promises were as unavailing as
threats, at last lost both his patience and his head, seizing the
girl roughly, and simultaneously there burst into the hut a raging
demon of jealousy. Naratu had come. Kicking, scratching, striking,
biting, she routed the terrified Usanga in short order, and
so obsessed was she by her desire to inflict punishment upon her
unfaithful lord and master that she quite forgot the object of his
infatuation.

Bertha Kircher heard her screaming down the village street at Usanga's
heels and trembled at the thought of what lay in store for her at
the hands of these two, for she knew that tomorrow at the latest
Naratu would take out upon her the full measure of her jealous
hatred after she had spent her first wrath upon Usanga.

The two had departed but a few minutes when the warrior guard
returned. He looked into the hut and then entered.  "No one will
stop me now, white woman," he growled as he stepped quickly across
the hut toward her.

Tarzan of the Apes, feasting well upon a juicy haunch from Bara,
the deer, was vaguely conscious of a troubled mind.  He should
have been at peace with himself and all the world, for was he not
in his native element surrounded by game in plenty and rapidly
filling his belly with the flesh he loved best?  But Tarzan of
the Apes was haunted by the picture of a slight, young girl being
shoved and struck by brutal Negresses, and in imagination could
see her now camped in this savage country a prisoner among degraded
blacks.

Why was it so difficult to remember that she was only a hated German
and a spy? Why would the fact that she was a woman and white always
obtrude itself upon his consciousness? He hated her as he hated
all her kind, and the fate that was sure to be hers was no more
terrible than she in common with all her people deserved. The matter
was settled and Tarzan composed himself to think of other things,
yet the picture would not die--it rose in all its details and annoyed
him. He began to wonder what they were doing to her and where they
were taking her. He was very much ashamed of himself as he had been
after the episode in Wilhelmstal when his weakness had permitted
him to spare this spy's life. Was he to be thus weak again? No!

Night came and he settled himself in an ample tree to rest until
morning; but sleep would not come. Instead came the vision of a
white girl being beaten by black women, and again of the same girl
at the mercy of the warriors somewhere in that dark and forbidding
jungle.

With a growl of anger and self-contempt Tarzan arose, shook himself,
and swung from his tree to that adjoining, and thus, through the
lower terraces, he followed the trail that Usanga's party had taken
earlier in the afternoon. He had little difficulty as the band had
followed a well-beaten path and when toward midnight the stench
of a native village assailed his delicate nostrils he guessed that
his goal was near and that presently he should find her whom he
sought.

Prowling stealthily as prowls Numa, the lion, stalking a wary
prey, Tarzan moved noiselessly about the palisade, listening and
sniffing. At the rear of the village he discovered a tree whose
branches extended over the top of the palisade and a moment later
he had dropped quietly into the village.

From hut to hut he went searching with keen ears and nostrils some
confirming evidence of the presence of the girl, and at last, faint
and almost obliterated by the odor of the Gomangani, he found it
hanging like a delicate vapor about a small hut. The village was
quiet now, for the last of the beer and the food had been disposed
of and the blacks lay in their huts overcome by stupor, yet Tarzan
made no noise that even a sober man keenly alert might have heard.

He passed around to the entrance of the hut and listened.  From
within came no sound, not even the low breathing of one awake; yet
he was sure that the girl had been here and perhaps was even now,
and so he entered, slipping in as silently as a disembodied spirit.
For a moment he stood motionless just within the entranceway,
listening. No, there was no one here, of that he was sure, but he
would investigate.  As his eyes became accustomed to the greater
darkness within the hut an object began to take form that presently
outlined itself in a human form supine upon the floor.

Tarzan stepped closer and leaned over to examine it--it was the dead
body of a naked warrior from whose chest protruded a short spear.
Then he searched carefully every square foot of the remaining floor
space and at last returned to the body again where he stooped and
smelled of the haft of the weapon that had slain the black. A slow
smile touched his lips--that and a slight movement of his head
betokened that he understood.

A rapid search of the balance of the village assured him that the
girl had escaped and a feeling of relief came over him that no harm
had befallen her. That her life was equally in jeopardy in the
savage jungle to which she must have flown did not impress him
as it would have you or me, since to Tarzan the jungle was not
a dangerous place--he considered one safer there than in Paris or
London by night.

He had entered the trees again and was outside the palisade when
there came faintly to his ears from far beyond the village an old,
familiar sound. Balancing lightly upon a swaying branch he stood,
a graceful statue of a forest god, listening intently. For a minute
he stood thus and then there broke from his lips the long, weird
cry of ape calling to ape and he was away through the jungle toward
the sound of the booming drum of the anthropoids leaving behind him
an awakened and terrified village of cringing blacks, who would
forever after connect that eerie cry with the disappearance of
their white prisoner and the death of their fellow-warrior.

Bertha Kircher, hurrying through the jungle along a well-beaten
game trail, thought only of putting as much distance as possible
between herself and the village before daylight could permit pursuit
of her. Whither she was going she did not know, nor was it a matter
of great moment since death must be her lot sooner or later.

Fortune favored her that night, for she passed unscathed through
as savage and lion-ridden an area as there is in all Africa--a
natural hunting ground which the white man has not yet discovered,
where deer and antelope and zebra, giraffe and elephant, buffalo,
rhinoceros, and the other herbivorous animals of central Africa
abound unmolested by none but their natural enemies, the great
cats which, lured here by easy prey and immunity from the rifles
of big-game hunters, swarm the district.

She had fled for an hour or two, perhaps, when her attention was
arrested by the sound of animals moving about, muttering and growling
close ahead. Assured that she had covered a sufficient distance
to insure her a good start in the morning before the blacks could
take to her trail, and fearful of what the creatures might be,
she climbed into a large tree with the intention of spending the
balance of the night there.

She had no sooner reached a safe and comfortable branch when she
discovered that the tree stood upon the edge of a small clearing
that had been hidden from her by the heavy undergrowth upon the
ground below, and simultaneously she discovered the identity of
the beasts she had heard.

In the center of the clearing below her, clearly visible in the
bright moonlight, she saw fully twenty huge, manlike apes--great,
shaggy fellows who went upon their hind feet with only slight
assistance from the knuckles of their hands. The moonlight glanced
from their glossy coats, the numerous gray-tipped hairs imparting
a sheen that made the hideous creatures almost magnificent in their
appearance.

The girl had watched them but a minute or two when the little band
was joined by others, coming singly and in groups until there were
fully fifty of the great brutes gathered there in the moonlight.
Among them were young apes and several little ones clinging tightly
to their mothers' shaggy shoulders.  Presently the group parted to
form a circle about what appeared to be a small, flat-topped mound
of earth in the center of the clearing. Squatting close about this
mound were three old females armed with short, heavy clubs with
which they presently began to pound upon the flat top of the earth
mound which gave forth a dull, booming sound, and almost immediately
the other apes commenced to move about restlessly, weaving in and
out aimlessly until they carried the impression of a moving mass
of great, black maggots.

The beating of the drum was in a slow, ponderous cadence, at first
without time but presently settling into a heavy rhythm to which
the apes kept time with measured tread and swaying bodies. Slowly
the mass separated into two rings, the outer of which was composed
of shes and the very young, the inner of mature bulls. The former
ceased to move and squatted upon their haunches, while the bulls
now moved slowly about in a circle the center of which was the drum
and all now in the same direction.

It was then that there came faintly to the ears of the girl from
the direction of the village she had recently quitted a weird and
high-pitched cry. The effect upon the apes was electrical--they
stopped their movements and stood in attitudes of intent listening
for a moment, and then one fellow, huger than his companions, raised
his face to the heavens and in a voice that sent the cold shudders
through the girl's slight frame answered the far-off cry.

Once again the beaters took up their drumming and the slow dance
went on. There was a certain fascination in the savage ceremony
that held the girl spellbound, and as there seemed little likelihood
of her being discovered, she felt that she might as well remain
the balance of the night in her tree and resume her flight by the
comparatively greater safety of daylight.

Assuring herself that her packet of papers was safe she sought as
comfortable a position as possible among the branches, and settled
herself to watch the weird proceedings in the clearing below her.

A half-hour passed, during which the cadence of the drum increased
gradually. Now the great bull that had replied to the distant call
leaped from the inner circle to dance alone between the drummers
and the other bulls. He leaped and crouched and leaped again, now
growling and barking, again stopping to raise his hideous face
to Goro, the moon, and, beating upon his shaggy breast, uttered
a piercing scream-the challenge of the bull ape, had the girl but
known it.

He stood thus in the full glare of the great moon, motionless after
screaming forth his weird challenge, in the setting of the primeval
jungle and the circling apes a picture of primitive savagery and
power--a mightily muscled Hercules out of the dawn of life--when
from close behind her the girl heard an answering scream, and an
instant later saw an almost naked white man drop from a near-by
tree into the clearing.

Instantly the apes became a roaring, snarling pack of angry beasts.
Bertha Kircher held her breath. What maniac was this who dared
approach these frightful creatures in their own haunts, alone against
fifty? She saw the brown-skinned figure bathed in moonlight walk
straight toward the snarling pack. She saw the symmetry and the
beauty of that perfect body--its grace, its strength, its wondrous
proportioning, and then she recognized him. It was the same creature
whom she had seen carry Major Schneider from General Kraut's
headquarters, the same who had rescued her from Numa, the lion;
the same whom she had struck down with the butt of her pistol and
escaped when he would have returned her to her enemies, the same
who had slain Hauptmann Fritz Schneider and spared her life that
night in Wilhelmstal.

Fear-filled and fascinated she watched him as he neared the apes.
She heard sounds issue from his throat--sounds identical with
those uttered by the apes--and though she could scarce believe the
testimony of her own ears, she knew that this godlike creature was
conversing with the brutes in their own tongue.

Tarzan halted just before he reached the shes of the outer circle.
"I am Tarzan of the Apes!" he cried. "You do not know me because
I am of another tribe, but Tarzan comes in peace or he comes to
fight--which shall it be? Tarzan will talk with your king," and so
saying he pushed straight forward through the shes and the young
who now gave way before him, making a narrow lane through which he
passed toward the inner circle.

Shes and balus growled and bristled as he passed closer, but none
hindered him and thus he came to the inner circle of bulls. Here
bared fangs menaced him and growling faces hideously contorted. "I
am Tarzan," he repeated. "Tarzan comes to dance the Dum-Dum with
his brothers. Where is your king?" Again he pressed forward and the
girl in the tree clapped her palms to her cheeks as she watched,
wide-eyed, this madman going to a frightful death. In another instant
they would be upon him, rending and tearing until that perfect form
had been ripped to shreds; but again the ring parted, and though
the apes roared and menaced him they did not attack, and at last
he stood in the inner circle close to the drum and faced the great
king ape.

Again he spoke. "I am Tarzan of the Apes," he cried.  "Tarzan comes
to live with his brothers. He will come in peace and live in peace
or he will kill; but he has come and he will stay. Which--shall
Tarzan dance the Dum-Dum in peace with his brothers, or shall Tarzan
kill first?"

"I am Go-lat, King of the Apes," screamed the great bull.  "I kill!
I kill! I kill!" and with a sullen roar he charged the Tarmangani.

The ape-man, as the girl watched him, seemed entirely unprepared
for the charge and she looked to see him borne down and slain at
the first rush. The great bull was almost upon him with huge hands
outstretched to seize him before Tarzan made a move, but when he
did move his quickness would have put Ara, the lightning, to shame.
As darts forward the head of Histah, the snake, so darted forward
the left hand of the man-beast as he seized the left wrist of his
antagonist. A quick turn and the bull's right arm was locked beneath
the right arm of his foe in a jujutsu hold that Tarzan had learned
among civilized men--a hold with which he might easily break the
great bones, a hold that left the ape helpless.

"I am Tarzan of the Apes!" screamed the ape-man. "Shall Tarzan
dance in peace or shall Tarzan kill?''

"I kill! I kill! I kill!" shrieked Go-lat.

With the quickness of a cat Tarzan swung the king ape over one hip
and sent him sprawling to the ground. "I am Tarzan, King of all
the Apes!" he shouted. "Shall it be peace?"

Go-lat, infuriated, leaped to his feet and charged again, shouting
his war cry: "I kill! I kill! I kill!" and again Tarzan met him
with a sudden hold that the stupid bull, being ignorant of, could
not possibly avert--a hold and a throw that brought a scream of
delight from the interested audience and suddenly filled the girl
with doubts as to the man's madness--evidently he was quite safe
among the apes, for she saw him swing Go-lat to his back and then
catapult him over his shoulder. The king ape fell upon his head
and lay very still.

"I am Tarzan of the Apes!" cried the ape-man. "I come to dance the
Dum-Dum with my brothers," and he made a motion to the drummers,
who immediately took up the cadence of the dance where they had
dropped it to watch their king slay the foolish Tarmangani.

It was then that Go-lat raised his head and slowly crawled to his
feet. Tarzan approached him. "I am Tarzan of the Apes," he cried.
"Shall Tarzan dance the Dum-Dum with his brothers now, or shall he
kill first?"

Go-lat raised his bloodshot eyes to the face of the Tarmangani.
"Kagoda!" he cried. "Tarzan of the Apes will dance the Dum-Dum with
his brothers and Go-lat will dance with him!"

And then the girl in the tree saw the savage man leaping, bending, and
stamping with the savage apes in the ancient rite of the Dum-Dum.
His roars and growls were more beastly than the beasts. His
handsome face was distorted with savage ferocity. He beat upon his
great breast and screamed forth his challenge as his smooth, brown
hide brushed the shaggy coats of his fellows. It was weird; it
was wonderful; and in its primitive savagery it was not without
beauty--the strange scene she looked upon, such a scene as no other
human being, probably, ever had witnessed--and yet, withal, it was
horrible.

As she gazed, spell-bound, a stealthy movement in the tree behind
her caused her to turn her head, and there, back of her, blazing
in the reflected moonlight, shone two great, yellow-green eyes.
Sheeta, the panther, had found her out.

The beast was so close that it might have reached out and touched
her with a great, taloned paw. There was no time to think, no
time to weigh chances or to choose alternatives.  Terror-inspired
impulse was her guide as, with a loud scream, she leaped from the
tree into the clearing.

Instantly the apes, now maddened by the effects of the dancing and
the moonlight, turned to note the cause of the interruption. They
saw this she Tarmangani, helpless and alone and they started for
her. Sheeta, the panther, knowing that not even Numa, the lion,
unless maddened by starvation, dares meddle with the great apes at
their Dum-Dum, had silently vanished into the night, seeking his
supper elsewhere.

Tarzan, turning with the other apes toward the cause of the
interruption, saw the girl, recognized her and also her peril.
Here again might she die at the hands of others; but why consider
it! He knew that he could not permit it, and though the acknowledgment
shamed him, it had to be admitted.

The leading shes were almost upon the girl when Tarzan leaped among
them, and with heavy blows scattered them to right and left; and
then as the bulls came to share in the kill they thought this new
ape-thing was about to make that he might steal all the flesh for
himself, they found him facing them with an arm thrown about the
creature as though to protect her.

"This is Tarzan's she," he said. "Do not harm her." It was the only
way he could make them understand that they must not slay her. He
was glad that she could not interpret the words. It was humiliating
enough to make such a statement to wild apes about this hated enemy.

So once again Tarzan of the Apes was forced to protect a Hun.
Growling, he muttered to himself in extenuation:

"She is a woman and I am not a German, so it could not be otherwise!"




Chapter IX

Dropped from the Sky


Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick, Royal Air Service, was on
reconnaissance. A report, or it would be better to say a rumor,
had come to the British headquarters in German East Africa that
the enemy had landed in force on the west coast and was marching
across the dark continent to reinforce their colonial troops. In
fact the new army was supposed to be no more than ten or twelve days'
march to the west. Of course the thing was ridiculous--preposterous--but
preposterous things often happen in war; and anyway no good general
permits the least rumor of enemy activity to go uninvestigated.

Therefore Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick flew low toward
the west, searching with keen eyes for signs of a Hun army. Vast
forests unrolled beneath him in which a German army corps might
have lain concealed, so dense was the overhanging foliage of the
great trees. Mountain, meadowland, and desert passed in lovely
panorama; but never a sight of man had the young lieutenant.

Always hoping that he might discover some sign of their passage--a
discarded lorry, a broken limber, or an old camp site--he continued
farther and farther into the west until well into the afternoon.
Above a tree-dotted plain through the center of which flowed a
winding river he determined to turn about and start for camp. It
would take straight flying at top speed to cover the distance before
dark; but as he had ample gasoline and a trustworthy machine there
was no doubt in his mind but that he could accomplish his aim. It
was then that his engine stalled.

He was too low to do anything but land, and that immediately,
while he had the more open country accessible, for directly east of
him was a vast forest into which a stalled engine could only have
plunged him to certain injury and probable death; and so he came
down in the meadowland near the winding river and there started to
tinker with his motor.

As he worked he hummed a tune, some music-hall air that had been
popular in London the year before, so that one might have thought
him working in the security of an English flying field surrounded
by innumerable comrades rather than alone in the heart of an unexplored
African wilderness. It was typical of the man that he should be
wholly indifferent to his surroundings, although his looks entirely
belied any assumption that he was of particularly heroic strain.

Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick was fair-haired, blue-eyed,
and slender, with a rosy, boyish face that might have been molded
more by an environment of luxury, indolence, and ease than the more
strenuous exigencies of life's sterner requirements.

And not only was the young lieutenant outwardly careless of the
immediate future and of his surroundings, but actually so. That
the district might be infested by countless enemies seemed not to
have occurred to him in the remotest degree.  He bent assiduously
to the work of correcting the adjustment that had caused his motor
to stall without so much as an upward glance at the surrounding
country. The forest to the east of him, and the more distant jungle
that bordered the winding river, might have harbored an army of
bloodthirsty savages, but neither could elicit even a passing show
of interest on the part of Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick.

And even had he looked, it is doubtful if he would have seen the
score of figures crouching in the concealment of the undergrowth
at the forest's edge. There are those who are reputed to be endowed
with that which is sometimes, for want of a better appellation,
known as the sixth sense--a species of intuition which apprises
them of the presence of an unseen danger. The concentrated gaze of
a hidden observer provokes a warning sensation of nervous unrest in
such as these, but though twenty pairs of savage eyes were gazing
fixedly at Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick, the fact aroused
no responsive sensation of impending danger in his placid breast.
He hummed peacefully and, his adjustment completed, tried out his
motor for a minute or two, then shut it off and descended to the
ground with the intention of stretching his legs and taking a smoke
before continuing his return flight to camp. Now for the first time
he took note of his surroundings, to be immediately impressed by
both the wildness and the beauty of the scene. In some respects the
tree-dotted meadowland reminded him of a park-like English forest,
and that wild beasts and savage men could ever be a part of so
quiet a scene seemed the remotest of contingencies.

Some gorgeous blooms upon a flowering shrub at a little distance
from his machine caught the attention of his aesthetic eye, and as
he puffed upon his cigarette, he walked over to examine the flowers
more closely. As he bent above them he was probably some hundred
yards from his plane and it was at this instant that Numabo, chief
of the Wamabo, chose to leap from his ambush and lead his warriors
in a sudden rush upon the white man.

The young Englishman's first intimation of danger was a chorus of
savage yells from the forest behind him. Turning, he saw a score
of naked, black warriors advancing rapidly toward him. They moved
in a compact mass and as they approached more closely their rate
of speed noticeably diminished. Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick realized
in a quick glance that the direction of their approach and their
proximity had cut off all chances of retreating to his plane, and
he also understood that their attitude was entirely warlike and
menacing. He saw that they were armed with spears and with bows and
arrows, and he felt quite confident that notwithstanding the fact
that he was armed with a pistol they could overcome him with the
first rush. What he did not know about their tactics was that at
any show of resistance they would fall back, which is the nature of
the native Negroes, but that after numerous advances and retreats,
during which they would work themselves into a frenzy of rage by
much shrieking, leaping, and dancing, they would eventually come
to the point of a determined and final assault.

Numabo was in the forefront, a fact which taken in connection with
his considerably greater size and more warlike appearance, indicated
him as the natural target and it was at Numabo that the Englishman
aimed his first shot. Unfortunately for him it missed its target,
as the killing of the chief might have permanently dispersed
the others. The bullet passed Numabo to lodge in the breast of a
warrior behind him and as the fellow lunged forward with a scream
the others turned and retreated, but to the lieutenant's chagrin
they ran in the direction of the plane instead of back toward the
forest so that he was still cut off from reaching his machine.

Presently they stopped and faced him again. They were talking loudly
and gesticulating, and after a moment one of them leaped into the
air, brandishing his spear and uttering savage war cries, which
soon had their effect upon his fellows so that it was not long ere
all of them were taking part in the wild show of savagery, which
would bolster their waning courage and presently spur them on to
another attack.

The second charge brought them closer to the Englishman, and though
he dropped another with his pistol, it was not before two or three
spears had been launched at him. He now had five shots remaining
and there were still eighteen warriors to be accounted for, so that
unless he could frighten them off, it was evident that his fate
was sealed.

That they must pay the price of one life for every attempt to take
his had its effect upon them and they were longer now in initiating
a new rush and when they did so it was more skillfully ordered than
those that had preceded it, for they scattered into three bands
which, partially surrounding him, came simultaneously toward him
from different directions, and though he emptied his pistol with
good effect, they reached him at last. They seemed to know that
his ammunition was exhausted, for they circled close about him now
with the evident intention of taking him alive, since they might
easily have riddled him with their sharp spears with perfect safety
to themselves.

For two or three minutes they circled about him until, at a word
from Numabo, they closed in simultaneously, and though the slender
young lieutenant struck out to right and left, he was soon overwhelmed
by superior numbers and beaten down by the hafts of spears in brawny
hands.

He was all but unconscious when they finally dragged him to his
feet, and after securing his hands behind his back, pushed him
roughly along ahead of them toward the jungle.

As the guard prodded him along the narrow trail, Lieutenant
Smith-Oldwick could not but wonder why they had wished to take him
alive. He knew that he was too far inland for his uniform to have
any significance to this native tribe to whom no inkling of the
World War probably ever had come, and he could only assume that he
had fallen into the hands of the warriors of some savage potentate
upon whose royal caprice his fate would hinge.

They had marched for perhaps half an hour when the Englishman saw
ahead of them, in a little clearing upon the bank of the river,
the thatched roofs of native huts showing above a crude but strong
palisade; and presently he was ushered into a village street where
he was immediately surrounded by a throng of women and children
and warriors.  Here he was soon the center of an excited mob whose
intent seemed to be to dispatch him as quickly as possible. The
women were more venomous than the men, striking and scratching him
whenever they could reach him, until at last Numabo, the chief, was
obliged to interfere to save his prisoner for whatever purpose he
was destined.

As the warriors pushed the crowd back, opening a space through
which the white man was led toward a hut, Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick
saw coming from the opposite end of the village a number of Negroes
wearing odds and ends of German uniforms. He was not a little
surprised at this, and his first thought was that he had at last
come in contact with some portion of the army which was rumored to
be crossing from the west coast and for signs of which he had been
searching.

A rueful smile touched his lips as he contemplated the unhappy
circumstances which surrounded the accession of this knowledge for
though he was far from being without hope, he realized that only
by the merest chance could he escape these people and regain his
machine.

Among the partially uniformed blacks was a huge fellow in the tunic
of a sergeant and as this man's eyes fell upon the British officer,
a loud cry of exultation broke from his lips, and immediately his
followers took up the cry and pressed forward to bait the prisoner.

"Where did you get the Englishman?" asked Usanga, the black sergeant,
of the chief Numabo. "Are there many more with him?"

"He came down from the sky," replied the native chief, "in a strange
thing which flies like a bird and which frightened us very much at
first; but we watched for a long time and saw that it did not seem
to be alive, and when this white man left it we attacked him and
though he killed some of my warriors, we took him, for we Wamabos
are brave men and great warriors."

Usanga's eyes went wide. "He flew here through the sky?" he asked.

"Yes," said Numabo. "In a great thing which resembled a bird he
flew down out of the sky. The thing is still there where it came
down close to the four trees near the second bend in the river. We
left it there because, not knowing what it was, we were afraid to
touch it and it is still there if it has not flown away again."

"It cannot fly," said Usanga, "without this man in it. It is a
terrible thing which filled the hearts of our soldiers with terror,
for it flew over our camps at night and dropped bombs upon us.
It is well that you captured this white man, Numabo, for with his
great bird he would have flown over your village tonight and killed
all your people. These Englishmen are very wicked white men."

"He will fly no more," said Numabo. "It is not intended that a man
should fly through the air; only wicked demons do such things as
that and Numabo, the chief, will see that this white man does not
do it again," and with the words he pushed the young officer roughly
toward a hut in the center of the village, where he was left under
guard of two stalwart warriors.

For an hour or more the prisoner was left to his own devices, which
consisted in vain and unremitting attempts to loosen the strands
which fettered his wrists, and then he was interrupted by the
appearance of the black sergeant Usanga, who entered his hut and
approached him.

"What are they going to do with me?" asked the Englishman. "My
country is not at war with these people. You speak their language.
Tell them that I am not an enemy, that my people are the friends
of the black people and that they must let me go in peace."

Usanga laughed. "They do not know an Englishman from a German," he
replied. "It is nothing to them what you are, except that you are
a white man and an enemy."

"Then why did they take me alive?" asked the lieutenant.

"Come," said Usanga and he led the Englishman to the doorway of
the hut. "Look," he said, and pointed a black forefinger toward
the end of the village street where a wider space between the huts
left a sort of plaza.

Here Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick saw a number of Negresses
engaged in laying fagots around a stake and in preparing fires
beneath a number of large cooking vessels.  The sinister suggestion
was only too obvious.

Usanga was eyeing the white man closely, but if he expected to be
rewarded by any signs of fear, he was doomed to disappointment and
the young lieutenant merely turned toward him with a shrug: "Really
now, do you beggars intend eating me?"

"Not my people," replied Usanga. "We do not eat human flesh, but
the Wamabos do. It is they who will eat you, but we will kill you
for the feast, Englishman."

The Englishman remained standing in the doorway of the hut, an
interested spectator of the preparations for the coming orgy that
was so horribly to terminate his earthly existence. It can hardly
be assumed that he felt no fear; yet, if he did, he hid it perfectly
beneath an imperturbable mask of coolness.  Even the brutal Usanga
must have been impressed by the bravery of his victim since, though
he had come to abuse and possibly to torture the helpless prisoner,
he now did neither, contenting himself merely with berating whites
as a race and Englishmen especially, because of the terror the
British aviators had caused Germany's native troops in East Africa.

"No more," he concluded, "will your great bird fly over our people
dropping death among them from the skies--Usanga will see to that,"
and he walked abruptly away toward a group of his own fighting men
who were congregated near the stake where they were laughing and
joking with the women.

A few minutes later the Englishman saw them pass out of the village
gate, and once again his thoughts reverted to various futile plans
for escape.

Several miles north of the village on a little rise of ground close
to the river where the jungle, halting at the base of a knoll, had
left a few acres of grassy land sparsely wooded, a man and a girl
were busily engaged in constructing a small boma, in the center of
which a thatched hut already had been erected.

They worked almost in silence with only an occasional word of
direction or interrogation between them.

Except for a loin cloth, the man was naked, his smooth skin tanned
to a deep brown by the action of sun and wind. He moved with the
graceful ease of a jungle cat and when he lifted heavy weights,
the action seemed as effortless as the raising of empty hands.

When he was not looking at her, and it was seldom that he did, the
girl found her eyes wandering toward him, and at such times there
was always a puzzled expression upon her face as though she found
in him an enigma which she could not solve.  As a matter of fact,
her feelings toward him were not un-tinged with awe, since in
the brief period of their association she had discovered in this
handsome, godlike giant the attributes of the superman and the
savage beast closely intermingled. At first she had felt only that
unreasoning feminine terror which her unhappy position naturally
induced.

To be alone in the heart of an unexplored wilderness of Central
Africa with a savage wild man was in itself sufficiently appalling,
but to feel also that this man was a blood enemy, that he hated her
and her kind and that in addition thereto he owed her a personal
grudge for an attack she had made upon him in the past, left no
loophole for any hope that he might accord her even the minutest
measure of consideration.

She had seen him first months since when he had entered the
headquarters of the German high command in East Africa and carried
off the luckless Major Schneider, of whose fate no hint had ever
reached the German officers; and she had seen him again upon that
occasion when he had rescued her from the clutches of the lion and,
after explaining to her that he had recognized her in the British
camp, had made her prisoner. It was then that she had struck him
down with the butt of her pistol and escaped. That he might seek
no personal revenge for her act had been evidenced in Wilhelmstal
the night that he had killed Hauptmann Fritz Schneider and left
without molesting her.

No, she could not fathom him. He hated her and at the same time
he had protected her as had been evidenced again when he had kept
the great apes from tearing her to pieces after she had escaped
from the Wamabo village to which Usanga, the black sergeant, had
brought her a captive; but why was he saving her? For what sinister
purpose could this savage enemy be protecting her from the other
denizens of his cruel jungle? She tried to put from her mind the
probable fate which awaited her, yet it persisted in obtruding
itself upon her thoughts, though always she was forced to admit that
there was nothing in the demeanor of the man to indicate that her
fears were well grounded. She judged him perhaps by the standards
other men had taught her and because she looked upon him as a savage
creature, she felt that she could not expect more of chivalry from
him than was to be found in the breasts of the civilized men of
her acquaintance.

Fraulein Bertha Kircher was by nature a companionable and cheerful
character. She was not given to morbid forebodings, and above all
things she craved the society of her kind and that interchange of
thought which is one of the marked distinctions between man and
the lower animals.  Tarzan, on the other hand, was sufficient unto
himself. Long years of semi-solitude among creatures whose powers
of oral expression are extremely limited had thrown him almost
entirely upon his own resources for entertainment.

His active mind was never idle, but because his jungle mates could
neither follow nor grasp the vivid train of imaginings that his
man-mind wrought, he had long since learned to keep them to himself;
and so now he found no need for confiding them in others. This
fact, linked with that of his dislike for the girl, was sufficient
to seal his lips for other than necessary conversation, and so they
worked on together in comparative silence. Bertha Kircher, however,
was nothing if not feminine and she soon found that having someone
to talk to who would not talk was extremely irksome. Her fear of
the man was gradually departing, and she was full of a thousand
unsatisfied curiosities as to his plans for the future in so far as
they related to her, as well as more personal questions regarding
himself, since she could not but wonder as to his antecedents and
his strange and solitary life in the jungle, as well as his friendly
intercourse with the savage apes among which she had found him.

With the waning of her fears she became sufficiently emboldened
to question him, and so she asked him what he intended doing after
the hut and boma were completed.

"I am going to the west coast where I was born," replied Tarzan.
"I do not know when. I have all my life before me and in the jungle
there is no reason for haste. We are not forever running as fast
as we can from one place to another as are you of the outer world.
When I have been here long enough I will go on toward the west,
but first I must see that you have a safe place in which to sleep,
and that you have learned how to provide yourself with necessaries.
That will take time."

"You are going to leave me here alone?" cried the girl; her tones
marked the fear which the prospect induced. "You are going to leave
me here alone in this terrible jungle, a prey to wild beasts and
savage men, hundreds of miles from a white settlement and in a
country which gives every evidence of never having been touched by
the foot of civilized men?"

"Why not?" asked Tarzan. "I did not bring you here. Would one of
your men accord any better treatment to an enemy woman?"

"Yes," she exclaimed. "They certainly would. No man of my race
would leave a defenseless white woman alone in this horrible place."

Tarzan shrugged his broad shoulders. The conversation seemed
profitless and it was further distasteful to him for the reason
that it was carried on in German, a tongue which he detested as
much as he did the people who spoke it. He wished that the girl
spoke English and then it occurred to him that as he had seen her
in disguise in the British camp carrying on her nefarious work as
a German spy, she probably did speak English and so he asked her.

"Of course I speak English," she exclaimed, "but I did not know
that you did."

Tarzan looked his wonderment but made no comment. He only wondered why
the girl should have any doubts as to the ability of an Englishman
to speak English, and then suddenly it occurred to him that she
probably looked upon him merely as a beast of the jungle who by
accident had learned to speak German through frequenting the district
which Germany had colonized. It was there only that she had seen
him and so she might not know that he was an Englishman by birth,
and that he had had a home in British East Africa. It was as well,
he thought, that she knew little of him, as the less she knew the
more he might learn from her as to her activities in behalf of the
Germans and of the German spy system of which she was a representative;
and so it occurred to him to let her continue to think that he was
only what he appeared to be--a savage denizen of his savage jungle,
a man of no race and no country, hating all white men impartially;
and this in truth, was what she did think of him. It explained
perfectly his attacks upon Major Schneider and the Major's brother,
Hauptmann Fritz.

Again they worked on in silence upon the boma which was now nearly
completed, the girl helping the man to the best of her small
ability. Tarzan could not but note with grudging approval the
spirit of helpfulness she manifested in the oft-times painful labor
of gathering and arranging the thorn bushes which constituted the
temporary protection against roaming carnivores. Her hands and arms
gave bloody token of the sharpness of the numerous points that had
lacerated her soft flesh, and even though she were an enemy Tarzan
could not but feel compunction that he had permitted her to do this
work, and at last he bade her stop.

"Why?" she asked. "It is no more painful to me than it must be to
you, and, as it is solely for my protection that you are building
this boma, there is no reason why I should not do my share."

"You are a woman," replied Tarzan. "This is not a woman's work. If
you wish to do something, take those gourds I brought this morning
and fill them with water at the river.  You may need it while I am
away."

"While you are away--" she said. "You are going away?"

"When the boma is built I am going out after meat," he replied.
"Tomorrow I will go again and take you and show you how you may
make your own kills after I am gone."

Without a word she took the gourds and walked toward the river. As
she filled them, her mind was occupied with painful forebodings of
the future. She knew that Tarzan had passed a death sentence upon
her, and that the moment that he left her, her doom was sealed,
for it could be but a question of time--a very short time--before
the grim jungle would claim her, for how could a lone woman hope
successfully to combat the savage forces of destruction which
constituted so large a part of existence in the jungle?

So occupied was she with the gloomy prophecies that she had neither
ears nor eyes for what went on about her. Mechanically she filled
the gourds and, taking them up, turned slowly to retrace her steps
to the boma only to voice immediately a half-stifled scream and
shrink back from the menacing figure looming before her and blocking
her way to the hut.

Go-lat, the king ape, hunting a little apart from his tribe, had seen
the woman go to the river for water, and it was he who confronted
her when she turned back with her filled gourds. Go-lat was not
a pretty creature when judged by standards of civilized humanity,
though the shes of his tribe and even Go-lat himself, considered
his glossy black coat shot with silver, his huge arms dangling to
his knees, his bullet head sunk between his mighty shoulders, marks
of great personal beauty. His wicked, bloodshot eyes and broad
nose, his ample mouth and great fighting fangs only enhanced the
claim of this Adonis of the forest upon the affections of his shes.

Doubtless in the little, savage brain there was a well-formed
conviction that this strange she belonging to the Tarmangani must
look with admiration upon so handsome a creature as Go-lat, for
there could be no doubt in the mind of any that his beauty entirely
eclipsed such as the hairless white ape might lay claim to.

But Bertha Kircher saw only a hideous beast, a fierce and terrible
caricature of man. Could Go-lat have known what passed through her
mind, he must have been terribly chagrined, though the chances are
that he would have attributed it to a lack of discernment on her
part. Tarzan heard the girl's cry and looking up saw at a glance
the cause of her terror. Leaping lightly over the boma, he ran
swiftly toward her as Go-lat lumbered closer to the girl the while
he voiced his emotions in low gutturals which, while in reality the
most amicable of advances, sounded to the girl like the growling
of an enraged beast. As Tarzan drew nearer he called aloud to the
ape and the girl heard from the human lips the same sounds that
had fallen from those of the anthropoid.

"I will not harm your she," Go-lat called to Tarzan.

"I know it," replied the ape-man, "but she does not. She is like
Numa and Sheeta, who do not understand our talk. She thinks you
come to harm her."

By this time Tarzan was beside the girl. "He will not harm you,"
he said to her. "You need not be afraid. This ape has learned his
lesson. He has learned that Tarzan is lord of the jungle. He will
not harm that which is Tarzan's."

The girl cast a quick glance at the man's face. It was evident to
her that the words he had spoken meant nothing to him and that the
assumed proprietorship over her was, like the boma, only another
means for her protection.

"But I am afraid of him," she said.

"You must not show your fear. You will be often surrounded by these
apes. At such times you will be safest. Before I leave you I will
give you the means of protecting yourself against them should one
of them chance to turn upon you. If I were you I would seek their
society. Few are the animals of the jungle that dare attack the
great apes when there are several of them together. If you let
them know that you are afraid of them, they will take advantage of
it and your life will be constantly menaced. The shes especially
would attack you. I will let them know that you have the means of
protecting yourself and of killing them. If necessary, I will show
you how and then they will respect and fear you."

"I will try," said the girl, "but I am afraid that it will be
difficult. He is the most frightful creature I ever have seen."
Tarzan smiled. "Doubtless he thinks the same of you," he said.

By this time other apes had entered the clearing and they were now
the center of a considerable group, among which were several bulls,
some young shes, and some older ones with their little balus clinging
to their backs or frolicking around at their feet. Though they had
seen the girl the night of the Dum-Dum when Sheeta had forced her
to leap from her concealment into the arena where the apes were
dancing, they still evinced a great curiosity regarding her. Some
of the shes came very close and plucked at her garments, commenting
upon them to one another in their strange tongue. The girl, by
the exercise of all the will power she could command, succeeded in
passing through the ordeal without evincing any of the terror and
revulsion that she felt. Tarzan watched her closely, a half-smile
upon his face. He was not so far removed from recent contact with
civilized people that he could not realize the torture that she
was undergoing, but he felt no pity for this woman of a cruel enemy
who doubtless deserved the worst suffering that could be meted to
her. Yet, notwithstanding his sentiments toward her, he was forced
to admire her fine display of courage. Suddenly he turned to the
apes.

"Tarzan goes to hunt for himself and his she," he said. "The she
will remain there," and he pointed toward the hut. "See that no
member of the tribe harms her. Do you understand?"

The apes nodded. "We will not harm her," said Go-lat.

"No," said Tarzan. "You will not. For if you do, Tarzan will kill
you," and then turning to the girl, "Come," he said, "I am going to
hunt now. You had better remain at the hut.  The apes have promised
not to harm you. I will leave my spear with you. It will be the best
weapon you could have in case you should need to protect yourself,
but I doubt if you will be in any danger for the short time that
I am away."

He walked with her as far as the boma and when she had entered he
closed the gap with thorn bushes and turned away toward the forest.
She watched him moving across the clearing, noting the easy, catlike
tread and the grace of every movement that harmonized so well with
the symmetry and perfection of his figure. At the forest's edge
she saw him swing lightly into a tree and disappear from view, and
then, being a woman, she entered the hut and, throwing herself upon
the ground, burst into tears.




Chapter X

In the Hands of Savages


Tarzan sought Bara, the deer, or Horta, the boar, for of all the
jungle animals he doubted if any would prove more palatable to the
white woman, but though his keen nostrils were ever on the alert,
he traveled far without being rewarded with even the faintest
scent spoor of the game he sought. Keeping close to the river where
he hoped to find Bara or Horta approaching or leaving a drinking
place he came at last upon the strong odor of the Wamabo village
and being ever ready to pay his hereditary enemies, the Gomangani,
an undesired visit, he swung into a detour and came up in the rear
of the village. From a tree which overhung the palisade he looked
down into the street where he saw the preparations going on which
his experience told him indicated the approach of one of those
frightful feasts the piece de resistance of which is human flesh.

One of Tarzan's chief divertissements was the baiting of the blacks.
He realized more keen enjoyment through annoying and terrifying them
than from any other source of amusement the grim jungle offered.
To rob them of their feast in some way that would strike terror
to their hearts would give him the keenest of pleasure, and so
he searched the village with his eyes for some indication of the
whereabouts of the prisoner.  His view was circumscribed by the
dense foliage of the tree in which he sat, and, so that he might
obtain a better view, he climbed further aloft and moved cautiously
out upon a slender branch.

Tarzan of the Apes possessed a woodcraft scarcely short of the
marvelous but even Tarzan's wondrous senses were not infallible.
The branch upon which he made his way outward from the bole was no
smaller than many that had borne his weight upon countless other
occasions. Outwardly it appeared strong and healthy and was in full
foliage, nor could Tarzan know that close to the stem a burrowing
insect had eaten away half the heart of the solid wood beneath the
bark.

And so when he reached a point far out upon the limb, it snapped
close to the bole of the tree without warning. Below him were no
larger branches that he might clutch and as he lunged downward his
foot caught in a looped creeper so that he turned completely over
and alighted on the flat of his back in the center of the village
street.

At the sound of the breaking limb and the crashing body falling
through the branches the startled blacks scurried to their huts
for weapons, and when the braver of them emerged, they saw the
still form of an almost naked white man lying where he had fallen.
Emboldened by the fact that he did not move they approached more
closely, and when their eyes discovered no signs of others of his
kind in the tree, they rushed forward until a dozen warriors stood
about him with ready spears. At first they thought that the falling
had killed him, but upon closer examination they discovered that
the man was only stunned. One of the warriors was for thrusting a
spear through his heart, but Numabo, the chief, would not permit
it.

"Bind him," he said. "We will feed well tonight."

And so they bound his hands and feet with thongs of gut and carried
him into the hut where Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick awaited
his fate. The Englishman had also been bound hand and foot by this
time for fear that at the last moment he might escape and rob them
of their feast. A great crowd of natives were gathered about the
hut attempting to get a glimpse of the new prisoner, but Numabo
doubled the guard before the entrance for fear that some of his
people, in the exuberance of their savage joy, might rob the others
of the pleasures of the death dance which would precede the killing
of the victims.

The young Englishman had heard the sound of Tarzan's body crashing
through the tree to the ground and the commotion in the village
which immediately followed, and now, as he stood with his back
against the wall of the hut, he looked upon the fellow-prisoner that
the blacks carried in and laid upon the floor with mixed feelings
of surprise and compassion.  He realized that he never had seen
a more perfect specimen of manhood than that of the unconscious
figure before him, and he wondered to what sad circumstances the
man owed his capture. It was evident that the new prisoner was
himself as much a savage as his captors if apparel and weapons were
any criterion by which to judge; yet it was also equally evident
that he was a white man and from his well-shaped head and clean-cut
features that he was not one of those unhappy halfwits who so often
revert to savagery even in the heart of civilized communities.

As he watched the man, he presently noticed that his eyelids were
moving. Slowly they opened and a pair of gray eyes looked blankly
about. With returning consciousness the eyes assumed their natural
expression of keen intelligence, and a moment later, with an
effort, the prisoner rolled over upon his side and drew himself to
a sitting position. He was facing the Englishman, and as his eyes
took in the bound ankles and the arms drawn tightly behind the
other's back, a slow smile lighted his features.

"They will fill their bellies tonight," he said.

The Englishman grinned. "From the fuss they made," he said, "the
beggars must be awfully hungry. They like to have eaten me alive
when they brought me in. How did they get you?"

Tarzan shrugged his head ruefully. "It was my own fault," he
replied. "I deserve to be eaten. I crawled out upon a branch that
would not bear my weight and when it broke, instead of alighting
on my feet, I caught my foot in a trailer and came down on my head.
Otherwise they would not have taken me--alive."

"Is there no escape?" asked the Englishman.

"I have escaped them before," replied Tarzan, "and I have seen
others escape them. I have seen a man taken away from the stake
after a dozen spear thrusts had pierced his body and the fire had
been lighted about his feet."

Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick shuddered. "God!" he exclaimed, "I hope I
don't have to face that. I believe I could stand anything but the
thought of the fire. I should hate like the devil to go into a funk
before the devils at the last moment."

"Don't worry," said Tarzan. "It doesn't last long and you won't
funk. It is really not half as bad as it sounds. There is only a
brief period of pain before you lose consciousness. I have seen it
many times before. It is as good a way to go as another. We must
die sometime. What difference whether it be tonight, tomorrow night,
or a year hence, just so that we have lived--and I have lived!"

"Your philosophy may be all right, old top," said the young
lieutenant, "but I can't say that it is exactly satisfying."

Tarzan laughed. "Roll over here," he said, "where I can get at
your bonds with my teeth." The Englishman did as he was bid and
presently Tarzan was working at the thongs with his strong white
teeth. He felt them giving slowly beneath his efforts. In another
moment they would part, and then it would be a comparatively simple
thing for the Englishman to remove the remaining bonds from Tarzan
and himself.

It was then that one of the guards entered the hut. In an instant he
saw what the new prisoner was doing and raising his spear, struck
the ape-man a vicious blow across the head with its shaft. Then he
called in the other guards and together they fell upon the luckless
men, kicking and beating them unmercifully, after which they bound
the Englishman more securely than before and tied both men fast on
opposite sides of the hut. When they had gone Tarzan looked across
at his companion in misery.

"While there is life," he said, "there is hope," but he grinned as
he voiced the ancient truism.

Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick returned the other's smile.
"I fancy," he said, "that we are getting short on both.  It must
be close to supper time now."

Zu-tag hunted alone far from the balance of the tribe of Go-lat,
the great ape. Zu-tag (Big-neck) was a young bull but recently
arrived at maturity. He was large, powerful, and ferocious and at
the same time far above the average of his kind in intelligence as
was denoted by a fuller and less receding forehead. Already Go-lat
saw in this young ape a possible contender for the laurels of his
kingship and consequently the old bull looked upon Zu-tag with
jealousy and disfavor. It was for this reason, possibly, as much
as another that Zu-tag hunted so often alone; but it was his utter
fearlessness that permitted him to wander far afield away from the
protection which numbers gave the great apes. One of the results
of this habit was a greatly increased resourcefulness which found
him constantly growing in intelligence and powers of observation.

Today he had been hunting toward the south and was returning along
the river upon a path he often followed because it led by the
village of the Gomangani whose strange and almost apelike actions
and peculiar manners of living had aroused his interest and curiosity.
As he had done upon other occasions he took up his position in a
tree from which he could overlook the interior of the village and
watch the blacks at their vocations in the street below.

Zu-tag had scarcely more than established himself in his tree when,
with the blacks, he was startled by the crashing of Tarzan's body
from the branches of another jungle giant to the ground within the
palisade. He saw the Negroes gather about the prostrate form and
later carry it into the hut; and once he rose to his full height
upon the limb where he had been squatting and raised his face to
the heavens to scream out a savage protest and a challenge, for he
had recognized in the brown-skinned Tarmangani the strange white
ape who had come among them a night or two before in the midst of
their Dum-Dum, and who by so easily mastering the greatest among
them, had won the savage respect and admiration of this fierce
young bull.

But Zu-tag's ferocity was tempered by a certain native cunning and
caution. Before he had voiced his protest there formed in his mind
the thought that he would like to save this wonderful white ape
from the common enemy, the Gomangani, and so he screamed forth no
challenge, wisely determining that more could be accomplished by
secrecy and stealth than by force of muscle and fang.

At first he thought to enter the village alone and carry off the
Tarmangani; but when he saw how numerous were the warriors and that
several sat directly before the entrance to the lair into which the
prisoner had been carried, it occurred to him that this was work
for many rather than one, and so, as silently as he had come, he
slipped away through the foliage toward the north.

The tribe was still loitering about the clearing where stood the hut
that Tarzan and Bertha Kircher had built. Some were idly searching
for food just within the forest's edge, while others squatted
beneath the shade of trees within the clearing.

The girl had emerged from the hut, her tears dried and was gazing
anxiously toward the south into the jungle where Tarzan had disappeared.
Occasionally she cast suspicious glances in the direction of the
huge shaggy anthropoids about her.  How easy it would be for one
of those great beasts to enter the boma and slay her. How helpless
she was, even with the spear that the white man had left her, she
realized as she noted for the thousandth time the massive shoulders,
the bull necks, and the great muscles gliding so easily beneath the
glossy coats. Never, she thought, had she seen such personifications
of brute power as were represented by these mighty bulls. Those
huge hands would snap her futile spear as she might snap a match in
two, while their lightest blow could crush her into insensibility
and death.

It was while she was occupied with these depressing thoughts that
there dropped suddenly into the clearing from the trees upon the
south the figure of a mighty young bull. At that time all of the
apes looked much alike to Bertha Kircher, nor was it until some
time later that she realized that each differed from the others
in individual characteristics of face and figure as do individuals
of the human races. Yet even then she could not help but note
the wondrous strength and agility of this great beast, and as he
approached she even found herself admiring the sheen of his heavy,
black, silvershot coat.

It was evident that the newcomer was filled with suppressed excitement.
His demeanor and bearing proclaimed this even from afar, nor was
the girl the only one to note it. For as they saw him coming many
of the apes arose and advanced to meet him, bristling and growling
as is their way. Go-lat was among these latter, and he advanced
stiffly with the hairs upon his neck and down his spine erect,
uttering low growls and baring his fighting fangs, for who might
say whether Zu-tag came in peace or otherwise? The old king had
seen other young apes come thus in his day filled with a sudden
resolution to wrest the kingship from their chief. He had seen
bulls about to run amuck burst thus suddenly from the jungle upon
the members of the tribe, and so Go-lat took no chances.

Had Zu-tag come indolently, feeding as he came, he might have
entered the tribe without arousing notice or suspicion, but when
one comes thus precipitately, evidently bursting with some emotion
out of the ordinary, let all apes beware. There was a certain amount
of preliminary circling, growling, and sniffing, stiff-legged and
stiff-haired, before each side discovered that the other had no
intention of initiating an attack and then Zu-tag told Go-lat what
he had seen among the lairs of the Gomangani.

Go-lat grunted in disgust and turned away. "Let the white ape take
care of himself," he said.

"He is a great ape," said Zu-tag. "He came to live in peace with
the tribe of Go-lat. Let us save him from the Gomangani."

Go-lat grunted again and continued to move away.

"Zu-tag will go alone and get him," cried the young ape, "if Go-lat
is afraid of the Gomangani."

The king ape wheeled in anger, growling loudly and beating upon
his breast. "Go-lat is not afraid," he screamed, "but he will not
go, for the white ape is not of his tribe. Go yourself and take
the Tarmangani's she with you if you wish so much to save the white
ape."

"Zu-tag will go," replied the younger bull, "and he will take the
Tarmangani's she and all the bulls of Go-lat who are not cowards,"
and so saying he cast his eyes inquiringly about at the other apes.
"Who will go with Zu-tag to fight the Gomangani and bring away our
brother," he demanded.

Eight young bulls in the full prime of their vigor pressed forward
to Zu-tag's side, but the old bulls with the conservatism and
caution of many years upon their gray shoulders, shook their heads
and waddled away after Go-lat.

"Good," cried Zu-tag. "We want no old shes to go with us to fight
the Gomangani for that is work for the fighters of the tribe."

The old bulls paid no attention to his boastful words, but the eight
who had volunteered to accompany him were filled with self-pride so
that they stood around vaingloriously beating upon their breasts,
baring their fangs and screaming their hideous challenge until the
jungle reverberated to the horrid sound.

All this time Bertha Kircher was a wide-eyed and terrified spectator to
what, as she thought, could end only in a terrific battle between
these frightful beasts, and when Zu-tag and his followers began
screaming forth their fearsome challenge, the girl found herself
trembling in terror, for of all the sounds of the jungle there is
none more awe inspiring than that of the great bull ape when he
issues his challenge or shrieks forth his victory cry.

If she had been terrified before she was almost paralyzed with
fear now as she saw Zu-tag and his apes turn toward the boma and
approach her. With the agility of a cat Zu-tag leaped completely
over the protecting wall and stood before her. Valiantly she held
her spear before her, pointing it at his breast.  He commenced to
jabber and gesticulate, and even with her scant acquaintance with
the ways of the anthropoids, she realized that he was not menacing
her, for there was little or no baring of fighting fangs and his
whole expression and attitude was of one attempting to explain a
knotty problem or plead a worthy cause. At last he became evidently
impatient, for with a sweep of one great paw he struck the spear
from her hand and coming close, seized her by the arm, but not
roughly.  She shrank away in terror and yet some sense within her
seemed to be trying to assure her that she was in no danger from
this great beast. Zu-tag jabbered loudly, ever and again pointing
into the jungle toward the south and moving toward the boma,
pulling the girl with him. He seemed almost frantic in his efforts
to explain something to her. He pointed toward the boma, herself,
and then to the forest, and then, at last, as though by a sudden
inspiration, he reached down and, seizing the spear, repeatedly
touched it with his forefinger and again pointed toward the south.
Suddenly it dawned upon the girl that what the ape was trying
to explain to her was related in some way to the white man whose
property they thought she was. Possibly her grim protector was in
trouble and with this thought firmly established, she no longer
held back, but started forward as though to accompany the young
bull. At the point in the boma where Tarzan had blocked the entrance,
she started to pull away the thorn bushes, and, when Zu-tag saw
what she was doing, he fell to and assisted her so that presently
they had an opening through the boma through which she passed with
the great ape.

Immediately Zu-tag and his eight apes started off rapidly toward
the jungle, so rapidly that Bertha Kircher would have had to run
at top speed to keep up with them. This she realized she could not
do, and so she was forced to lag behind, much to the chagrin of
Zu-tag, who constantly kept running back and urging her to greater
speed. Once he took her by the arm and tried to draw her along.
Her protests were of no avail since the beast could not know that
they were protests, nor did he desist until she caught her foot in
some tangled grass and fell to the ground. Then indeed was Zu-tag
furious and growled hideously. His apes were waiting at the edge
of the forest for him to lead them. He suddenly realized that this
poor weak she could not keep up with them and that if they traveled
at her slow rate they might be too late to render assistance to the
Tarmangani, and so without more ado, the giant anthropoid picked
Bertha Kircher bodily from the ground and swung her to his back.
Her arms were about his neck and in this position he seized her
wrists in one great paw so that she could not fall off and started
at a rapid rate to join his companions.

Dressed as she was in riding breeches with no entangling skirts to
hinder or catch upon passing shrubbery, she soon found that she
could cling tightly to the back of the mighty bull and when a moment
later he took to the lower branches of the trees, she closed her
eyes and clung to him in terror lest she be precipitated to the
ground below.

That journey through the primeval forest with the nine great apes
will live in the memory of Bertha Kircher for the balance of her
life, as clearly delineated as at the moment of its enactment.

The first overwhelming wave of fear having passed, she was at last
able to open her eyes and view her surroundings with increased
interest and presently the sensation of terror slowly left her to
be replaced by one of comparative security when she saw the ease
and surety with which these great beasts traveled through the trees;
and later her admiration for the young bull increased as it became
evident that even burdened with her additional weight, he moved more
rapidly and with no greater signs of fatigue than his unburdened
fellows.

Not once did Zu-tag pause until he came to a stop among the branches
of a tree no great distance from the native village.  They could
hear the noises of the life within the palisade, the laughing and
shouting of the Negroes, and the barking of dogs, and through the
foliage the girl caught glimpses of the village from which she had
so recently escaped. She shuddered to think of the possibility of
having to return to it and of possible recapture, and she wondered
why Zu-tag had brought her here.

Now the apes advanced slowly once more and with great caution,
moving as noiselessly through the trees as the squirrels themselves
until they had reached a point where they could easily overlook
the palisade and the village street below.

Zu-tag squatted upon a great branch close to the bole of the tree
and by loosening the girl's arms from about his neck, indicated
that she was to find a footing for herself and when she had done
so, he turned toward her and pointed repeatedly at the open doorway
of a hut upon the opposite side of the street below them. By various
gestures he seemed to be trying to explain something to her and at
last she caught at the germ of his idea--that her white man was a
prisoner there.

Beneath them was the roof of a hut onto which she saw that she
could easily drop, but what she could do after she had entered the
village was beyond her.

Darkness was already falling and the fires beneath the cooking pots
had been lighted. The girl saw the stake in the village street and
the piles of fagots about it and in terror she suddenly realized
the portent of these grisly preparations. Oh, if she but only had
some sort of a weapon that might give her even a faint hope, some
slight advantage against the blacks.  Then she would not hesitate
to venture into the village in an attempt to save the man who had
upon three different occasions saved her. She knew that he hated her
and yet strong within her breast burned the sense of her obligation
to him. She could not fathom him. Never in her life had she seen a
man at once so paradoxical and dependable. In many of his ways he
was more savage than the beasts with which he associated and yet,
on the other hand, he was as chivalrous as a knight of old.  For
several days she had been lost with him in the jungle absolutely
at his mercy, yet she had come to trust so implicitly in his honor
that any fear she had had of him was rapidly disappearing.

On the other hand, that he might be hideously cruel was evidenced
to her by the fact that he was planning to leave her alone in the
midst of the frightful dangers which menaced her by night and by
day.

Zu-tag was evidently waiting for darkness to fall before carrying
out whatever plans had matured in his savage little brain, for he
and his fellows sat quietly in the tree about her, watching the
preparations of the blacks. Presently it became apparent that some
altercation had arisen among the Negroes, for a score or more of
them were gathered around one who appeared to be their chief, and
all were talking and gesticulating heatedly. The argument lasted
for some five or ten minutes when suddenly the little knot broke
and two warriors ran to the opposite side of the village from whence
they presently returned with a large stake which they soon set up
beside the one already in place. The girl wondered what the purpose
of the second stake might be, nor did she have long to wait for an
explanation.

It was quite dark by this time, the village being lighted by the
fitful glare of many fires, and now she saw a number of warriors
approach and enter the hut Zu-tag had been watching. A moment later
they reappeared, dragging between them two captives, one of whom
the girl immediately recognized as her protector and the other as
an Englishman in the uniform of an aviator. This, then, was the
reason for the two stakes.

Arising quickly she placed a hand upon Zu-tag's shoulder and pointed
down into the village. "Come," she said, as if she had been talking
to one of her own kind, and with the word she swung lightly to the
roof of the hut below. From there to the ground was but a short drop
and a moment later she was circling the hut upon the side farthest
from the fires, keeping in the dense shadows where there was little
likelihood of being discovered. She turned once to see that Zu-tag
was directly behind her and could see his huge bulk looming up
in the dark, while beyond was another one of his eight. Doubtless
they had all followed her and this fact gave her a greater sense
of security and hope than she had before experienced.

Pausing beside the hut next to the street, she peered cautiously
about the corner. A few inches from her was the open doorway of the
structure, and beyond, farther down the village street, the blacks
were congregating about the prisoners, who were already being bound
to the stakes. All eyes were centered upon the victims, and there
was only the remotest chance that she and her companions would
be discovered until they were close upon the blacks. She wished,
however, that she might have some sort of a weapon with which to
lead the attack, for she could not know, of course, for a certainty
whether the great apes would follow her or not. Hoping that she
might find something within the hut, she slipped quickly around
the corner and into the doorway and after her, one by one, came
the nine bulls. Searching quickly about the interior, she presently
discovered a spear, and, armed with this, she again approached the
entrance.

Tarzan of the Apes and Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick were
bound securely to their respective stakes.  Neither had spoken for
some time. The Englishman turned his head so that he could see his
companion in misery. Tarzan stood straight against his stake. His
face was entirely expressionless in so far as either fear or anger
were concerned. His countenance portrayed bored indifference though
both men knew that they were about to be tortured.

"Good-bye, old top," whispered the young lieutenant.

Tarzan turned his eyes in the direction of the other and smiled.
"Good-bye," he said. "If you want to get it over in a hurry, inhale
the smoke and flames as rapidly as you can."

"Thanks," replied the aviator and though he made a wry face, he
drew himself up very straight and squared his shoulders.

The women and children had seated themselves in a wide circle about
the victims while the warriors, hideously painted, were forming
slowly to commence the dance of death. Again Tarzan turned to his
companion. "If you'd like to spoil their fun," he said, "don't
make any fuss no matter how much you suffer. If you can carry on to
the end without changing the expression upon your face or uttering
a single word, you will deprive them of all the pleasures of this
part of the entertainment. Good-bye again and good luck."

The young Englishman made no reply but it was evident from the set
of his jaws that the Negroes would get little enjoyment out of him.

The warriors were circling now. Presently Numabo would draw first
blood with his sharp spear which would be the signal for the
beginning of the torture after a little of which the fagots would
be lighted around the feet of the victims.

Closer and closer danced the hideous chief, his yellow, sharp-filed
teeth showing in the firelight between his thick, red lips. Now
bending double, now stamping furiously upon the ground, now leaping
into the air, he danced step by step in the narrowing circle that
would presently bring him within spear reach of the intended feast.

At last the spear reached out and touched the ape-man on the
breast and when it came away, a little trickle of blood ran down
the smooth, brown hide and almost simultaneously there broke from
the outer periphery of the expectant audience a woman's shriek which
seemed a signal for a series of hideous screamings, growlings and
barkings, and a great commotion upon that side of the circle. The
victims could not see the cause of the disturbance, but Tarzan did
not have to see, for he knew by the voices of the apes the identity
of the disturbers.  He only wondered what had brought them and what
the purpose of the attack, for he could not believe that they had
come to rescue him.

Numabo and his warriors broke quickly from the circle of their dance
to see pushing toward them through the ranks of their screaming
and terrified people the very white girl who had escaped them a
few nights before, and at her back what appeared to their surprised
eyes a veritable horde of the huge and hairy forest men upon whom
they looked with considerable fear and awe.

Striking to right and left with his heavy fists, tearing with
his great fangs, came Zu-tag, the young bull, while at his heels,
emulating his example, surged his hideous apes. Quickly they came
through the old men and the women and children, for straight toward
Numabo and his warriors the girl led them.  It was then that they
came within range of Tarzan's vision and he saw with unmixed surprise
who it was that led the apes to his rescue.

To Zu-tag he shouted: "Go for the big bulls while the she unbinds
me," and to Bertha Kircher: "Quick! Cut these bonds.  The apes will
take care of the blacks."

Turning from her advance the girl ran to his side. She had no knife
and the bonds were tied tightly but she worked quickly and coolly
and as Zu-tag and his apes closed with the warriors, she succeeded
in loosening Tarzan's bonds sufficiently to permit him to extricate
his own hands so that in another minute he had freed himself.

"Now unbind the Englishman," he cried, and, leaping forward, ran
to join Zu-tag and his fellows in their battle against the blacks.
Numabo and his warriors, realizing now the relatively small numbers
of the apes against them, had made a determined stand and with
spears and other weapons were endeavoring to overcome the invaders.
Three of the apes were already down, killed or mortally wounded,
when Tarzan, realizing that the battle must eventually go against
the apes unless some means could be found to break the morale of
the Negroes, cast about him for some means of bringing about the
desired end. And suddenly his eye lighted upon a number of weapons
which he knew would accomplish the result. A grim smile touched
his lips as he snatched a vessel of boiling water from one of the
fires and hurled it full in the faces of the warriors. Screaming
with terror and pain they fell back though Numabo urged them to
rush forward.

Scarcely had the first cauldron of boiling water spilled its
contents upon them ere Tarzan deluged them with a second, nor was
there any third needed to send them shrieking in every direction
to the security of their huts.

By the time Tarzan had recovered his own weapons the girl had released
the young Englishman, and, with the six remaining apes, the three
Europeans moved slowly toward the village gate, the aviator arming
himself with a spear discarded by one of the scalded warriors, as
they eagerly advanced toward the outer darkness.

Numabo was unable to rally the now thoroughly terrified and
painfully burned warriors so that rescued and rescuers passed out
of the village into the blackness of the jungle without further
interference.

Tarzan strode through the jungle in silence. Beside him walked Zu-tag,
the great ape, and behind them strung the surviving anthropoids
followed by Fraulein Bertha Kircher and Lieutenant Harold Percy
Smith-Oldwick, the latter a thoroughly astonished and mystified
Englishman.

In all his life Tarzan of the Apes had been obliged to acknowledge
but few obligations. He won his way through his savage world by the
might of his own muscle, the superior keenness of his five senses
and his God-given power to reason.  Tonight the greatest of
all obligations had been placed upon him--his life had been saved
by another and Tarzan shook his head and growled, for it had been
saved by one whom he hated above all others.




Chapter XI

Finding the Airplane


Tarzan of the Apes, returning from a successful hunt, with the
body of Bara, the deer, across one sleek, brown shoulder, paused
in the branches of a great tree at the edge of a clearing and gazed
ruefully at two figures walking from the river to the boma-encircled
hut a short distance away.

The ape-man shook his tousled head and sighed. His eyes wandered
toward the west and his thoughts to the far-away cabin by the
land-locked harbor of the great water that washed the beach of his
boyhood home--to the cabin of his long-dead father to which the
memories and treasures of a happy childhood lured him. Since the
loss of his mate, a great longing had possessed him to return to
the haunts of his youth--to the untracked jungle wilderness where
he had lived the life he loved best long before man had invaded
the precincts of his wild stamping grounds. There he hoped in a
renewal of the old life under the old conditions to win surcease
from sorrow and perhaps some measure of forgetfulness.

But the little cabin and the land-locked harbor were many long,
weary marches away, and he was handicapped by the duty which he
felt he owed to the two figures walking in the clearing before him.
One was a young man in a worn and ragged uniform of the British Royal
Air Forces, the other, a young woman in the even more disreputable
remnants of what once had been trim riding togs.

A freak of fate had thrown these three radically different types
together. One was a savage, almost naked beast-man, one an English
army officer, and the woman, she whom the ape-man knew and hated
as a German spy.

How he was to get rid of them Tarzan could not imagine unless
he accompanied them upon the weary march back to the east coast,
a march that would necessitate his once more retracing the long,
weary way he already had covered towards his goal, yet what else
could be done? These two had neither the strength, endurance, nor
jungle-craft to accompany him through the unknown country to the
west, nor did he wish them with him. The man he might have tolerated,
but he could not even consider the presence of the girl in the
far-off cabin, which had in a way become sacred to him through
its memories, without a growl or anger rising to his lips. There
remained, then, but the one way, since he could not desert them.
He must move by slow and irksome marches back to the east coast,
or at least to the first white settlement in that direction.

He had, it is true, contemplated leaving the girl to her fate but
that was before she had been instrumental in saving him from torture
and death at the hands of the black Wamabos.  He chafed under the
obligation she had put upon him, but no less did he acknowledge
it and as he watched the two, the rueful expression upon his face
was lightened by a smile as he thought of the helplessness of them.
What a puny thing, indeed, was man! How ill equipped to combat the
savage forces of nature and of nature's jungle. Why, even the tiny
balu of the tribe of Go-lat, the great ape, was better fitted to
survive than these, for a balu could at least escape the numerous
creatures that menaced its existence, while with the possible
exception of Kota, the tortoise, none moved so slowly as did helpless
and feeble man.

Without him these two doubtless would starve in the midst of plenty,
should they by some miracle escape the other forces of destruction
which constantly threatened them. That morning Tarzan had brought
them fruit, nuts, and plantain, and now he was bringing them the
flesh of his kill, while the best that they might do was to fetch
water from the river. Even now, as they walked across the clearing
toward the boma, they were in utter ignorance of the presence
of Tarzan near them. They did not know that his sharp eyes were
watching them, nor that other eyes less friendly were glaring at
them from a clump of bushes close beside the boma entrance. They
did not know these things, but Tarzan did. No more than they could
he see the creature crouching in the concealment of the foliage, yet
he knew that it was there and what it was and what its intentions,
precisely as well as though it had been lying in the open.

A slight movement of the leaves at the top of a single stem had
apprised him of the presence of a creature there, for the movement
was not that imparted by the wind. It came from pressure at the
bottom of the stem which communicates a different movement to the
leaves than does the wind passing among them, as anyone who has
lived his lifetime in the jungle well knows, and the same wind that
passed through the foliage of the bush brought to the ape-man's
sensitive nostrils indisputable evidence of the fact that Sheeta,
the panther, waited there for the two returning from the river.

They had covered half the distance to the boma entrance when Tarzan
called to them to stop. They looked in surprise in the direction
from which his voice had come to see him drop lightly to the ground
and advance toward them.

"Come slowly toward me," he called to them. "Do not run for if you
run Sheeta will charge."

They did as he bid, their faces filled with questioning wonderment.

"What do you mean?" asked the young Englishman. "Who is Sheeta?"
but for answer the ape-man suddenly hurled the carcass of Bara, the
deer, to the ground and leaped quickly toward them, his eyes upon
something in their rear; and then it was that the two turned and
learned the identity of Sheeta, for behind them was a devil-faced
cat charging rapidly toward them.

Sheeta with rising anger and suspicion had seen the ape-man leap
from the tree and approach the quarry. His life's experiences backed
by instinct told him that the Tarmangani was about to rob him of
his prey and as Sheeta was hungry, he had no intention of being
thus easily deprived of the flesh he already considered his own.

The girl stifled an involuntary scream as she saw the proximity
of the fanged fury bearing down upon them. She shrank close to the
man and clung to him and all unarmed and defenseless as he was, the
Englishman pushed her behind him and shielding her with his body,
stood squarely in the face of the panther's charge. Tarzan noted
the act, and though accustomed as he was to acts of courage, he
experienced a thrill from the hopeless and futile bravery of the
man.

The charging panther moved rapidly, and the distance which separated
the bush in which he had concealed himself from the objects of his
desire was not great. In the time that one might understandingly
read a dozen words the strong-limbed cat could have covered the
entire distance and made his kill, yet if Sheeta was quick, quick
too was Tarzan. The English lieutenant saw the ape-man flash by him
like the wind. He saw the great cat veer in his charge as though
to elude the naked savage rushing to meet him, as it was evidently
Sheeta's intention to make good his kill before attempting to
protect it from Tarzan.

Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick saw these things and then with increasing
wonder he saw the ape-man swerve, too, and leap for the spotted cat
as a football player leaps for a runner. He saw the strong, brown
arms encircling the body of the carnivore, the left arm in front
of the beast's left shoulder and the right arm behind his right
foreleg, and with the impact the two together rolling over and over
upon the turf. He heard the snarls and growls of bestial combat,
and it was with a feeling of no little horror that he realized that
the sounds coming from the human throat of the battling man could
scarce be distinguished from those of the panther.

The first momentary shock of terror over, the girl released her
grasp upon the Englishman's arm. "Cannot we do something?" she
asked. "Cannot we help him before the beast kills him?"

The Englishman looked upon the ground for some missile with which
to attack the panther and then the girl uttered an exclamation and
started at a run toward the hut. "Wait there," she called over her
shoulder. "I will fetch the spear that he left me."

Smith-Oldwick saw the raking talons of the panther searching for
the flesh of the man and the man on his part straining every muscle
and using every artifice to keep his body out of range of them. The
muscles of his arms knotted under the brown hide. The veins stood
out upon his neck and forehead as with ever-increasing power he
strove to crush the life from the great cat. The ape-man's teeth
were fastened in the back of Sheeta's neck and now he succeeded
in encircling the beast's torso with his legs which he crossed and
locked beneath the cat's belly. Leaping and snarling, Sheeta sought
to dislodge the ape-man's hold upon him. He hurled himself upon
the ground and rolled over and over. He reared upon his hind legs
and threw himself backwards but always the savage creature upon
his back clung tenaciously to him, and always the mighty brown arms
crushed tighter and tighter about his chest.

And then the girl, panting from her quick run, returned with the
short spear Tarzan had left her as her sole weapon of protection.
She did not wait to hand it to the Englishman who ran forward to
receive it, but brushed past him and leaped into close quarters
beside the growling, tumbling mass of yellow fur and smooth brown
hide. Several times she attempted to press the point home into
the cat's body, but on both occasions the fear of endangering the
ape-man caused her to desist, but at last the two lay motionless
for a moment as the carnivore sought a moment's rest from the
strenuous exertions of battle, and then it was that Bertha Kircher
pressed the point of the spear to the tawny side and drove it deep
into the savage heart.

Tarzan rose from the dead body of Sheeta and shook himself after
the manner of beasts that are entirely clothed with hair. Like
many other of his traits and mannerisms this was the result of
environment rather than heredity or reversion, and even though he
was outwardly a man, the Englishman and the girl were both impressed
with the naturalness of the act.  It was as though Numa, emerging
from a fight, had shaken himself to straighten his rumpled mane and
coat, and yet, too, there was something uncanny about it as there
had been when the savage growls and hideous snarls issued from
those clean-cut lips.

Tarzan looked at the girl, a quizzical expression upon his face.
Again had she placed him under obligations to her, and Tarzan of
the Apes did not wish to be obligated to a German spy; yet in his
honest heart he could not but admit a certain admiration for her
courage, a trait which always greatly impressed the ape-man, he
himself the personification of courage.

"Here is the kill," he said, picking the carcass of Bara from the
ground. "You will want to cook your portion, I presume, but Tarzan
does not spoil his meat with fire."

They followed him to the boma where he cut several pieces of meat
from the carcass for them, retaining a joint for himself. The
young lieutenant prepared a fire, and the girl presided over the
primitive culinary rights of their simple meal.  As she worked some
little way apart from them, the lieutenant and the ape-man watched
her.

"She is wonderful. Is she not?" murmured Smith-Oldwick.

"She is a German and a spy," replied Tarzan.

The Englishman turned quickly upon him. "What do you mean?" he
cried.

"I mean what I say," replied the ape-man. "She is a German and a
spy."

"I do not believe it!" exclaimed the aviator.

"You do not have to," Tarzan assured him. "It is nothing to me
what you believe. I saw her in conference with the Boche general
and his staff at the camp near Taveta. They all knew her and called
her by name and she handed him a paper. The next time I saw her
she was inside the British lines in disguise, and again I saw her
bearing word to a German officer at Wilhelmstal. She is a German
and a spy, but she is a woman and therefore I cannot destroy her."

"You really believe that what you say is true?" asked the young
lieutenant. "My God! I cannot believe it. She is so sweet and brave
and good."

The ape-man shrugged his shoulders. "She is brave," he said, "but
even Pamba, the rat, must have some good quality, but she is what
I have told you and therefore I hate her and you should hate her."

Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick buried his face in his hands.
"God forgive me," he said at last. "I cannot hate her."

The ape-man cast a contemptuous look at his companion and arose.
"Tarzan goes again to hunt," he said. "You have enough food for
two days. By that time he will return."

The two watched him until he had disappeared in the foliage of the
trees at the further side of the clearing.

When he had gone the girl felt a vague sense of apprehension that
she never experienced when Tarzan was present. The invisible menaces
lurking in the grim jungle seemed more real and much more imminent
now that the ape-man was no longer near. While he had been there
talking with them, the little thatched hut and its surrounding
thorn boma had seemed as safe a place as the world might afford.
She wished that he had remained--two days seemed an eternity in
contemplation--two days of constant fear, two days, every moment of
which would be fraught with danger. She turned toward her companion.

"I wish that he had remained," she said. "I always feel so much
safer when he is near. He is very grim and very terrible, and yet
I feel safer with him than with any man I ever have known. He seems
to dislike me and yet I know that he would let no harm befall me.
I cannot understand him."

"Neither do I understand him," replied the Englishman; "but I know
this much--our presence here is interfering with his plans. He would
like to be rid of us, and I half imagine that he rather hopes to
find when he returns that we have succumbed to one of the dangers
which must always confront us in this savage land.

"I think that we should try to return to the white settlements. This
man does not want us here, nor is it reasonable to assume that we
could long survive in such a savage wilderness. I have traveled and
hunted in several parts of Africa, but never have I seen or heard
of any single locality so overrun with savage beasts and dangerous
natives. If we set out for the east coast at once we would be in
but little more danger than we are here, and if we could survive
a day's march, I believe that we will find the means of reaching
the coast in a few hours, for my plane must still be in the same
place that I landed just before the blacks captured me. Of course
there is no one here who could operate it nor is there any reason
why they should have destroyed it. As a matter of fact, the natives
would be so fearful and suspicious of so strange and incomprehensible
a thing that the chances are they would not dare approach it. Yes,
it must be where I left it and all ready to carry us safely to the
settlements."

"But we cannot leave," said the girl, "until he returns. We could
not go away like that without thanking him or bidding him farewell.
We are under too great obligations to him."

The man looked at her in silence for a moment. He wondered if
she knew how Tarzan felt toward her and then he himself began to
speculate upon the truth of the ape-man's charges. The longer he
looked at the girl, the less easy was it to entertain the thought
that she was an enemy spy. He was upon the point of asking
her point-blank but he could not bring himself to do so, finally
determining to wait until time and longer acquaintance should reveal
the truth or falsity of the accusation.

"I believe," he said as though there had been no pause in their
conversation, "that the man would be more than glad to find us
gone when he returns. It is not necessary to jeopardize our lives
for two more days in order that we may thank him, however much
we may appreciate his services to us. You have more than balanced
your obligations to him and from what he told me I feel that you
especially should not remain here longer."

The girl looked up at him in astonishment. "What do you mean?" she
asked.

"I do not like to tell," said the Englishman, digging nervously at
the turf with the point of a stick, "but you have my word that he
would rather you were not here."

"Tell me what he said," she insisted, "I have a right to know."

Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick squared his shoulders and raised his eyes
to those of the girl. "He said that he hated you," he blurted. "He
has only aided you at all from a sense of duty because you are a
woman."

The girl paled and then flushed. "I will be ready to go," she said,
"in just a moment. We had better take some of this meat with us.
There is no telling when we will be able to get more."

And so the two set out down the river toward the south.  The man
carried the short spear that Tarzan had left with the girl, while
she was entirely unarmed except for a stick she had picked up from
among those left after the building of the hut. Before departing
she had insisted that the man leave a note for Tarzan thanking him
for his care of them and bidding him goodbye. This they left pinned
to the inside wall of the hut with a little sliver of wood.

It was necessary that they be constantly on the alert since they
never knew what might confront them at the next turn of the winding
jungle trail or what might lie concealed in the tangled bushes at
either side. There was also the ever-present danger of meeting some
of Numabo's black warriors and as the village lay directly in their
line of march, there was the necessity for making a wide detour
before they reached it in order to pass around it without being
discovered.

"I am not so much afraid of the native blacks," said the girl, "as
I am of Usanga and his people. He and his men were all attached
to a German native regiment. They brought me along with them when
they deserted, either with the intention of holding me ransom or
selling me into the harem of one of the black sultans of the north.
Usanga is much more to be feared than Numabo for he has had the
advantage of European military training and is armed with more or
less modern weapons and ammunition."

"It is lucky for me," remarked the Englishman, "that it was the
ignorant Numabo who discovered and captured me rather than the
worldly wise Usanga. He would have felt less fear of the giant
flying machine and would have known only too well how to wreck it."

"Let us pray that the black sergeant has not discovered it," said
the girl.

They made their way to a point which they guessed was about a mile
above the village, then they turned into the trackless tangle of
undergrowth to the east. So dense was the verdure at many points
that it was with the utmost difficulty they wormed their way through,
sometimes on hands and knees and again by clambering over numerous
fallen tree trunks. Interwoven with dead limbs and living branches
were the tough and ropelike creepers which formed a tangled network
across their path.

South of them in an open meadowland a number of black warriors were
gathered about an object which elicited much wondering comment. The
blacks were clothed in fragments of what had once been uniforms of
a native German command. They were a most unlovely band and chief
among them in authority and repulsiveness was the black sergeant
Usanga. The object of their interest was a British aeroplane.

Immediately after the Englishman had been brought to Numabo's village
Usanga had gone out in search of the plane, prompted partially by
curiosity and partially by an intention to destroy it, but when he
had found it, some new thought had deterred him from carrying out
his design. The thing represented considerable value as he well
knew and it had occurred to him that in some way he might turn his
prize to profit.  Every day he had returned to it, and while at
first it had filled him with considerable awe, he eventually came
to look upon it with the accustomed eye of a proprietor, so that
he now clambered into the fuselage and even advanced so far as to
wish that he might learn to operate it.

What a feat it would be indeed to fly like a bird far above the
highest tree top! How it would fill his less favored companions
with awe and admiration! If Usanga could but fly, so great would be
the respect of all the tribesmen throughout the scattered villages
of the great interior, they would look upon him as little less than
a god.

Usanga rubbed his palms together and smacked his thick lips. Then
indeed, would he be very rich, for all the villages would pay
tribute to him and he could even have as many as a dozen wives.
With that thought, however, came a mental picture of Naratu, the
black termagant, who ruled him with an iron hand. Usanga made a
wry face and tried to forget the extra dozen wives, but the lure of
the idea remained and appealed so strongly to him that he presently
found himself reasoning most logically that a god would not be much
of a god with less than twenty-four wives.

He fingered the instruments and the control, half hoping and half
fearing that he would alight upon the combination that would put
the machine in flight. Often had he watched the British air-men
soaring above the German lines and it looked so simple he was quite
sure that he could do it himself if there was somebody who could
but once show him how. There was, of course, always the hope that
the white man who came in the machine and who had escaped from
Numabo's village might fall into Usanga's hands and then indeed
would he be able to learn how to fly. It was in this hope that
Usanga spent so much time in the vicinity of the plane, reasoning
as he did that eventually the white man would return in search of
it.

And at last he was rewarded, for upon this very day after he had
quit the machine and entered the jungle with his warriors, he heard
voices to the north and when he and his men had hidden in the dense
foliage upon either side of the trail, Usanga was presently filled
with elation by the appearance of the British officer and the white
girl whom the black sergeant had coveted and who had escaped him.

The Negro could scarce restrain a shout of elation, for he had not
hoped that fate would be so kind as to throw these two whom he most
desired into his power at the same time.

As the two came down the trail all unconscious of impending danger,
the man was explaining that they must be very close to the point
at which the plane had landed. Their entire attention was centered
on the trail directly ahead of them, as they momentarily expected
it to break into the meadowland where they were sure they would
see the plane that would spell life and liberty for them.

The trail was broad, and they were walking side by side so that at
a sharp turn the park-like clearing was revealed to them simultaneously
with the outlines of the machine they sought.

Exclamations of relief and delight broke from their lips, and at
the same instant Usanga and his black warriors rose from the bushes
all about them.




Chapter XII

The Black Flier


The girl was almost crushed by terror and disappointment.  To have
been thus close to safety and then to have all hope snatched away
by a cruel stroke of fate seemed unendurable. The man was disappointed,
too, but more was he angry. He noted the remnants of the uniforms
upon the blacks and immediately he demanded to know where were
their officers.

"They cannot understand you," said the girl and so in the bastard
tongue that is the medium of communication between the Germans and
the blacks of their colony, she repeated the white man's question.

Usanga grinned. "You know where they are, white woman," he replied.
"They are dead, and if this white man does not do as I tell him,
he, too, will be dead."

"What do you want of him?" asked the girl.

"I want him to teach me how to fly like a bird," replied Usanga.

Bertha Kircher looked her astonishment, but repeated the demand to
the lieutenant.

The Englishman meditated for a moment. "He wants to learn to fly,
does he?" he repeated. "Ask him if he will give us our freedom if
I teach him to fly."

The girl put the question to Usanga, who, degraded, cunning, and
entirely unprincipled, was always perfectly willing to promise
anything whether he had any intentions of fulfilling his promises
or not, and so immediately assented to the proposition.

"Let the white man teach me to fly," he said, "and I will take you
back close to the settlements of your people, but in return for
this I shall keep the great bird," and he waved a black hand in
the direction of the aeroplane.

When Bertha Kircher had repeated Usanga's proposition to the
aviator, the latter shrugged his shoulders and with a wry face
finally agreed. "I fancy there is no other way out of it," he said.
"In any event the plane is lost to the British government. If I
refuse the black scoundrel's request, there is no doubt but what
he will make short work of me with the result that the machine will
lie here until it rots. If I accept his offer it will at least be
the means of assuring your safe return to civilization and that"
he added, "is worth more to me than all the planes in the British
Air Service."

The girl cast a quick glance at him. These were the first words he
had addressed to her that might indicate that his sentiments toward
her were more than those of a companion in distress. She regretted
that he had spoken as he had and he, too, regretted it almost
instantly as he saw the shadow cross her face and realized that
he had unwittingly added to the difficulties of her already almost
unbearable situation.

"Forgive me," he said quickly. "Please forget what that remark
implied. I promise you that I will not offend again, if it does
offend you, until after we are both safely out of this mess."

She smiled and thanked him, but the thing had been said and could
never be unsaid, and Bertha Kircher knew even more surely than as
though he had fallen upon his knees and protested undying devotion
that the young English officer loved her.

Usanga was for taking his first lesson in aviation immediately. The
Englishman attempted to dissuade him, but immediately the black
became threatening and abusive, since, like all those who are
ignorant, he was suspicious that the intentions of others were
always ulterior unless they perfectly coincided with his wishes.

"All right, old top," muttered the Englishman, "I will give you
the lesson of your life," and then turning to the girl: "Persuade
him to let you accompany us. I shall be afraid to leave you here
with these devilish scoundrels." But when she put the suggestion
to Usanga the black immediately suspected some plan to thwart
him--possibly to carry him against his will back to the German
masters he had traitorously deserted, and glowering at her savagely,
he obstinately refused to entertain the suggestion.

"The white woman will remain here with my people," he said. "They
will not harm her unless you fail to bring me back safely."

"Tell him," said the Englishman, "that if you are not standing in
plain sight in this meadow when I return, I will not land, but will
carry Usanga back to the British camp and have him hanged."

Usanga promised that the girl would be in evidence upon their
return, and took immediate steps to impress upon his warriors that
under penalty of death they must not harm her.  Then, followed
by the other members of his party, he crossed the clearing toward
the plane with the Englishman. Once seated within what he already
considered his new possession, the black's courage began to wane
and when the motor was started and the great propeller commenced
to whir, he screamed to the Englishman to stop the thing and permit
him to alight, but the aviator could neither hear nor understand
the black above the noise of the propeller and exhaust. By this
time the plane was moving along the ground and even then Usanga was
upon the verge of leaping out, and would have done so had he been
able to unfasten the strap from about his waist. Then the plane rose
from the ground and in a moment soared gracefully in a wide circle
until it topped the trees. The black sergeant was in a veritable
collapse of terror. He saw the earth dropping rapidly from beneath
him.  He saw the trees and river and at a distance the little clearing
with the thatched huts of Numabo's village. He tried hard not to
think of the results of a sudden fall to the rapidly receding ground
below. He attempted to concentrate his mind upon the twenty-four
wives which this great bird most assuredly would permit him to
command. Higher and higher rose the plane, swinging in a wide circle
above the forest, river, and meadowland and presently, much to his
surprise, Usanga discovered that his terror was rapidly waning, so
that it was not long before there was forced upon him a consciousness
of utter security, and then it was that he began to take notice of
the manner in which the white man guided and manipulated the plane.

After half an hour of skillful maneuvering, the Englishman rose
rapidly to a considerable altitude, and then, suddenly, without
warning, he looped and flew with the plane inverted for a few
seconds.

"I said I'd give this beggar the lesson of his life," he murmured as
he heard, even above the whir of the propeller, the shriek of the
terrified Negro. A moment later Smith-Oldwick had righted the machine
and was dropping rapidly toward the earth. He circled slowly a few
times above the meadow until he had assured himself that Bertha
Kircher was there and apparently unharmed, then he dropped gently
to the ground so that the machine came to a stop a short distance
from where the girl and the warriors awaited them.

It was a trembling and ashen-hued Usanga who tumbled out of the
fuselage, for his nerves were still on edge as a result of the
harrowing experience of the loop, yet with terra firma once more
under foot, he quickly regained his composure.  Strutting about
with great show and braggadocio, he strove to impress his followers
with the mere nothingness of so trivial a feat as flying birdlike
thousands of yards above the jungle, though it was long until he
had thoroughly convinced himself by the force of autosuggestion
that he had enjoyed every instant of the flight and was already
far advanced in the art of aviation.

So jealous was the black of his new-found toy that he would not
return to the village of Numabo, but insisted on making camp close
beside the plane, lest in some inconceivable fashion it should be
stolen from him. For two days they camped there, and constantly
during daylight hours Usanga compelled the Englishman to instruct
him in the art of flying.

Smith-Oldwick, in recalling the long months of arduous training he
had undergone himself before he had been considered sufficiently
adept to be considered a finished flier, smiled at the conceit of
the ignorant African who was already demanding that he be permitted
to make a flight alone.

"If it was not for losing the machine," the Englishman explained to
the girl, "I'd let the bounder take it up and break his fool neck
as he would do inside of two minutes."

However, he finally persuaded Usanga to bide his time for a few
more days of instruction, but in the suspicious mind of the Negro
there was a growing conviction that the white man's advice was prompted
by some ulterior motive; that it was in the hope of escaping with
the machine himself by night that he refused to admit that Usanga
was entirely capable of handling it alone and therefore in no further
need of help or instruction, and so in the mind of the black there
formed a determination to outwit the white man. The lure of the
twenty-four seductive wives proved in itself a sufficient incentive
and there, too, was added his desire for the white girl whom he
had long since determined to possess.

It was with these thoughts in mind that Usanga lay down to sleep
in the evening of the second day. Constantly, however, the thought
of Naratu and her temper arose to take the keen edge from his pleasant
imaginings. If he could but rid himself of her! The thought having
taken form persisted, but always it was more than outweighed by the
fact that the black sergeant was actually afraid of his woman, so
much afraid of her in fact that he would not have dared to attempt
to put her out of the way unless he could do so secretly while
she slept. However, as one plan after another was conjured by the
strength of his desires, he at last hit upon one which came to him
almost with the force of a blow and brought him sitting upright
among his sleeping companions.

When morning dawned Usanga could scarce wait for an opportunity to
put his scheme into execution, and the moment that he had eaten,
he called several of his warriors aside and talked with them for
some moments.

The Englishman, who usually kept an eye upon his black captor,
saw now that the latter was explaining something in detail to his
warriors, and from his gestures and his manner it was apparent that
he was persuading them to some new plan as well as giving them
instructions as to what they were to do. Several times, too, he
saw the eyes of the Negroes turned upon him and once they flashed
simultaneously toward the white girl.

Everything about the occurrence, which in itself seemed trivial enough,
aroused in the mind of the Englishman a well-defined apprehension
that something was afoot that boded ill for him and for the girl.
He could not free himself of the idea and so he kept a still closer
watch over the black although, as he was forced to admit to himself,
he was quite powerless to avert any fate that lay in store for
them. Even the spear that he had had when captured had been taken
away from him, so that now he was unarmed and absolutely at the
mercy of the black sergeant and his followers.

Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick did not have long to wait
before discovering something of Usanga's plan, for almost immediately
after the sergeant finished giving his instructions, a number of
warriors approached the Englishman, while three went directly to
the girl.

Without a word of explanation the warriors seized the young officer
and threw him to the ground upon his face. For a moment he struggled
to free himself and succeeded in landing a few heavy blows among
his assailants, but he was too greatly outnumbered to hope to more
than delay them in the accomplishment of their object which he
soon discovered was to bind him securely hand and foot. When they
had finally secured him to their satisfaction, they rolled him
over on his side and then it was he saw Bertha Kircher had been
similarly trussed.

Smith-Oldwick lay in such a position that he could see nearly the
entire expanse of meadow and the aeroplane a short distance away.
Usanga was talking to the girl who was shaking her head in vehement
negatives.

"What is he saying?" called the Englishman.

"He is going to take me away in the plane," the girl called back.
"He is going to take me farther inland to another country where
he says that he will be king and I am to be one of his wives," and
then to the Englishman's surprise she turned a smiling face toward
him, "but there is no danger," she continued, "for we shall both
be dead within a few minutes--just give him time enough to get
the machine under way, and if he can rise a hundred feet from the
ground I shall never need fear him more."

"God!" cried the man. "Is there no way that you can dissuade him?
Promise him anything. Anything that you want.  I have money, more
money than that poor fool could imagine there was in the whole
world. With it he can buy anything that money will purchase, fine
clothes and food and women, all the women he wants. Tell him this
and tell him that if he will spare you I give him my word that I
will fetch it all to him."

The girl shook her head. "It is useless," she said. "He would not
understand and if he did understand, he would not trust you. The
blacks are so unprincipled themselves that they can imagine no
such thing as principle or honor in others, and especially do these
blacks distrust an Englishman whom the Germans have taught them to
believe are the most treacherous and degraded of people. No, it is
better thus. I am sorry that you cannot go with us, for if he goes
high enough my death will be much easier than that which probably
awaits you."

Usanga had been continually interrupting their brief conversation
in an attempt to compel the girl to translate it to him, for he
feared that they were concocting some plan to thwart him, and to
quiet and appease him, she told him that the Englishman was merely
bidding her farewell and wishing her good luck. Suddenly she turned
to the black. "Will you do something for me?" she asked. "If I go
willingly with you?"

"What is it you want?" he inquired.

"Tell your men to free the white man after we are gone.  He can
never catch us. That is all I ask of you. If you will grant him
his freedom and his life, I will go willingly with you.

"You will go with me anyway," growled Usanga. "It is nothing to
me whether you go willingly or not. I am going to be a great king
and you will do whatever I tell you to do."

He had in mind that he would start properly with this woman. There
should be no repetition of his harrowing experience with Naratu.
This wife and the twenty-four others should be carefully selected
and well trained. Hereafter Usanga would be master in his own house.

Bertha Kircher saw that it was useless to appeal to the brute
and so she held her peace though she was filled with sorrow in
contemplating the fate that awaited the young officer, scarce more
than a boy, who had impulsively revealed his love for her.

At Usanga's order one of the blacks lifted her from the ground and
carried her to the machine, and after Usanga had clambered aboard,
they lifted her up and he reached down and drew her into the fuselage
where he removed the thongs from her wrists and strapped her into
her seat and then took his own directly ahead of her.

The girl turned her eyes toward the Englishman. She was very pale
but her lips smiled bravely.

"Good-bye!" she cried.

"Good-bye, and God bless you!" he called back--his voice the least
bit husky--and then: "The thing I wanted to say--may I say it now,
we are so very near the end?"

Her lips moved but whether they voiced consent or refusal he did
not know, for the words were drowned in the whir of the propeller.

The black had learned his lesson sufficiently well so that the
motor was started without bungling and the machine was soon under
way across the meadowland. A groan escaped the lips of the distracted
Englishman as he watched the woman he loved being carried to almost
certain death. He saw the plane tilt and the machine rise from
the ground. It was a good take-off--as good as Lieutenant Harold
Percy Smith-Oldwick could make himself but he realized that it was
only so by chance. At any instant the machine might plunge to earth
and even if, by some miracle of chance, the black could succeed
in rising above the tree tops and make a successful flight, there
was not one chance in one hundred thousand that he could ever land
again without killing his fair captive and himself.

But what was that? His heart stood still.




Chapter XIII

Usanga's Reward


For two days Tarzan of the Apes had been hunting leisurely to the
north, and swinging in a wide circle, he had returned to within
a short distance of the clearing where he had left Bertha Kircher
and the young lieutenant. He had spent the night in a large tree
that overhung the river only a short distance from the clearing,
and now in the early morning hours he was crouching at the water's
edge waiting for an opportunity to capture Pisah, the fish, thinking
that he would take it back with him to the hut where the girl could
cook it for herself and her companion.

Motionless as a bronze statue was the wily ape-man, for well he knew
how wary is Pisah, the fish. The slightest movement would frighten
him away and only by infinite patience might he be captured at
all. Tarzan depended upon his own quickness and the suddenness of
his attack, for he had no bait or hook. His knowledge of the ways
of the denizens of the water told him where to wait for Pisah. It
might be a minute or it might be an hour before the fish would swim
into the little pool above which he crouched, but sooner or later
one would come. That the ape-man knew, so with the patience of the
beast of prey he waited for his quarry.

At last there was a glint of shiny scales. Pisah was coming.  In a
moment he would be within reach and then with the swiftness of light
two strong, brown hands would plunge into the pool and seize him,
but, just at the moment that the fish was about to come within reach,
there was a great crashing in the underbrush behind the ape-man.
Instantly Pisah was gone and Tarzan, growling, had wheeled about
to face whatever creature might be menacing him. The moment that
he turned he saw that the author of the disturbance was Zu-tag.

"What does Zu-tag want?" asked the ape-man.

"Zu-tag comes to the water to drink," replied the ape.

"Where is the tribe?" asked Tarzan.

"They are hunting for pisangs and scimatines farther back in the
forest," replied Zu-tag.

"And the Tarmangani she and bull--" asked Tarzan, "are they safe?"

"They have gone away," replied Zu-tag. "Kudu has come out of his
lair twice since they left."

"Did the tribe chase them away?" asked Tarzan.

"No," replied the ape. "We did not see them go. We do not know why
they left."

Tarzan swung quickly through the trees toward the clearing.  The
hut and boma were as he had left them, but there was no sign of
either the man or the woman. Crossing the clearing, he entered the
boma and then the hut. Both were empty, and his trained nostrils
told him that they had been gone for at least two days. As he was
about to leave the hut he saw a paper pinned upon the wall with a
sliver of wood and taking it down, he read:


After what you told me about Miss Kircher, and knowing that you
dislike her, I feel that it is not fair to her and to you that we
should impose longer upon you. I know that our presence is keeping
you from continuing your journey to the west coast, and so I
have decided that it is better for us to try and reach the white
settlements immediately without imposing further upon you. We both
thank you for your kindness and protection. If there was any way
that I might repay the obligation I feel, I should be only too glad
to do so.


It was signed by Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick.

Tarzan shrugged his shoulders, crumpled the note in his hand and
tossed it aside. He felt a certain sense of relief from responsibility
and was glad that they had taken the matter out of his hands. They
were gone and would forget, but somehow he could not forget. He
walked out across the boma and into the clearing. He felt uneasy
and restless.  Once he started toward the north in response to
a sudden determination to continue his way to the west coast. He
would follow the winding river toward the north a few miles where
its course turned to the west and then on toward its source across
a wooded plateau and up into the foothills and the mountains. Upon
the other side of the range he would search for a stream running
downward toward the west coast, and thus following the rivers he
would be sure of game and water in plenty.

But he did not go far. A dozen steps, perhaps, and he came to
a sudden stop. "He is an Englishman," he muttered, "and the other
is a woman. They can never reach the settlements without my help.
I could not kill her with my own hands when I tried, and if I let
them go on alone, I will have killed her just as surely as though
I had run my knife into her heart.  No," and again he  shook his
head. "Tarzan of the Apes is a fool and a weak, old woman," and he
turned back toward the south.

Manu, the monkey, had seen the two Tarmangani pass two days before.
Chattering and scolding, he told Tarzan all about it. They had
gone in the direction of the village of the Gomangani, that much
had Manu seen with his own eyes, so the ape-man swung on through
the jungle in a southerly direction and though with no concentrated
effort to follow the spoor of those he trailed, he passed numerous
evidences that they had gone this way--faint suggestions of their
scent spoor clung lightly to leaf or branch or bole that one
or the other had touched, or in the earth of the trail their feet
had trod, and where the way wound through the gloomy depth of dank
forest, the impress of their shoes still showed occasionally in
the damp mass of decaying vegetation that floored the way.

An inexplicable urge spurred Tarzan to increasing, speed.  The
same still, small voice that chided him for having neglected them
seemed constantly whispering that they were in dire need of him
now. Tarzan's conscience was troubling him, which accounted for
the fact that he compared himself to a weak, old woman, for the
ape-man, reared in savagery and inured to hardships and cruelty,
disliked to admit any of the gentler traits that in reality were
his birthright.

The trail made a detour to the east of the village of the Wamabos,
and then returned to the wide elephant path nearer to the river,
where it continued in a southerly direction for several miles. At
last there came to the ears of the ape-man a peculiar whirring,
throbbing sound. For an instant he paused, listening intently, "An
aeroplane!" he muttered, and hastened forward at greatly increased
speed.

When Tarzan of the Apes finally reached the edge of the meadowland
where Smith-Oldwick's plane had landed, he took in the entire scene
in one quick glance and grasped the situation, although he could
scarce give credence to the things he saw. Bound and helpless,
the English officer lay upon the ground at one side of the meadow,
while around him stood a number of the black deserters from the
German command.  Tarzan had seen these men before and knew who they
were.  Coming toward him down the meadow was an aeroplane piloted
by the black Usanga and in the seat behind the pilot was the white
girl, Bertha Kircher. How it befell that the ignorant savage could
operate the plane, Tarzan could not guess nor had he time in which
to speculate upon the subject.  His knowledge of Usanga, together
with the position of the white man, told him that the black sergeant
was attempting to carry off the white girl. Why he should be doing
this when he had her in his power and had also captured and secured
the only creature in the jungle who might wish to defend her in so
far as the black could know, Tarzan could not guess, for he knew
nothing of Usanga's twenty-four dream wives nor of the black's
fear of the horrid temper of Naratu, his present mate. He did not
know, then, that Usanga had determined to fly away with the white
girl never to return, and to put so great a distance between himself
and Naratu that the latter never could find him again; but it was
this very thing that was in the black's mind although not even his
own warriors guessed it. He had told them that he would take the
captive to a sultan of the north and there obtain a great price for
her and that when he returned they should have some of the spoils.

These things Tarzan did not know. All he knew was what he saw--a
Negro attempting to fly away with a white girl.  Already the
machine was slowly leaving the ground. In a moment more it would
rise swiftly out of reach. At first Tarzan thought of fitting an
arrow to his bow and slaying Usanga, but as quickly he abandoned
the idea because he knew that the moment the pilot was slain the
machine, running wild, would dash the girl to death among the trees.

There was but one way in which he might hope to succor her--a way
which if it failed must send him to instant death and yet he did
not hesitate in an attempt to put it into execution.

Usanga did not see him, being too intent upon the unaccustomed duties
of a pilot, but the blacks across the meadow saw him and they ran
forward with loud and savage cries and menacing rifles to intercept
him. They saw a giant white man leap from the branches of a tree
to the turf and race rapidly toward the plane. They saw him take
a long grass rope from about his shoulders as he ran. They saw the
noose swinging in an undulating circle above his head. They saw
the white girl in the machine glance down and discover him.

Twenty feet above the running ape-man soared the huge plane. The
open noose shot up to meet it, and the girl, half guessing the
ape-man's intentions, reached out and caught the noose and, bracing
herself, clung tightly to it with both hands. Simultaneously Tarzan
was dragged from his feet and the plane lurched sideways in response
to the new strain.  Usanga clutched wildly at the control and the
machine shot upward at a steep angle. Dangling at the end of the
rope the ape-man swung pendulum-like in space. The Englishman, lying
bound upon the ground, had been a witness of all these happenings.
His heart stood still as he saw Tarzan's body hurtling through the
air toward the tree tops among which it seemed he must inevitably
crash; but the plane was rising rapidly, so that the beast-man
cleared the top-most branches.  Then slowly, hand over hand, he
climbed toward the fuselage.  The girl, clinging desperately to the
noose, strained every muscle to hold the great weight dangling at
the lower end of the rope.

Usanga, all unconscious of what was going on behind him, drove the
plane higher and higher into the air.

Tarzan glanced downward. Below him the tree tops and the river
passed rapidly to the rear and only a slender grass rope and the
muscles of a frail girl stood between him and the death yawning
there thousands of feet below.

It seemed to Bertha Kircher that the fingers of her hands were dead.
The numbness was running up her arms to her elbows. How much longer
she could cling to the straining strands she could not guess. It
seemed to her that those lifeless fingers must relax at any instant
and then, when she had about given up hope, she saw a strong brown
hand reach up and grasp the side of the fuselage. Instantly the
weight upon the rope was removed and a moment later Tarzan of the
Apes raised his body above the side and threw a leg over the edge.
He glanced forward at Usanga and then, placing his mouth close to
the girl's ear he cried: "Have you ever piloted a plane?" The girl
nodded a quick affirmative.

"Have you the courage to climb up there beside the black and seize
the control while I take care of him?"

The girl looked toward Usanga and shuddered. "Yes," she replied,
"but my feet are bound."

Tarzan drew his hunting knife from its sheath and reaching down,
severed the thongs that bound her ankles. Then the girl unsnapped
the strap that held her to her seat. With one hand Tarzan grasped
the girl's arm and steadied her as the two crawled slowly across
the few feet which intervened between the two seats. A single slight
tip of the plane would have cast them both into eternity. Tarzan
realized that only through a miracle of chance could they reach
Usanga and effect the change in pilots and yet he knew that that
chance must be taken, for in the brief moments since he had first
seen the plane, he had realized that the black was almost without
experience as a pilot and that death surely awaited them in any
event should the black sergeant remain at the control.

The first intimation Usanga had that all was not well with him was
when the girl slipped suddenly to his side and grasped the control
and at the same instant steel-like fingers seized his throat. A brown
hand shot down with a keen blade and severed the strap about his
waist and giant muscles lifted him bodily from his seat. Usanga
clawed the air and shrieked but he was helpless as a babe. Far
below the watchers in the meadow could see the aeroplane careening
in the sky, for with the change of control it had taken a sudden
dive. They saw it right itself and, turning in a short circle, return
in their direction, but it was so far above them and the light of
the sun so strong that they could see nothing of what was going on
within the fuselage; but presently Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick gave
a gasp of dismay as he saw a human body plunge downward from the
plane. Turning and twisting in mid-air it fell with ever-increasing
velocity and the Englishman held his breath as the thing hurtled
toward them.

With a muffled thud it flattened upon the turf near the center of
the meadow, and when at last the Englishman could gain the courage
to again turn his eyes upon it, he breathed a fervent prayer of
thanks, for the shapeless mass that lay upon the blood-stained turf
was covered with an ebon hide.  Usanga had reaped his reward.

Again and again the plane circled above the meadow. The blacks, at
first dismayed at the death of their leader, were now worked to a
frenzy of rage and a determination to be avenged. The girl and the
ape-man saw them gather in a knot about the body of their fallen
chief. They saw as they circled above the meadow the black fists
shaken at them, and the rifles brandishing a menace toward them.
Tarzan still clung to the fuselage directly behind the pilot's seat.
His face was close beside Bertha Kircher's, and at the top of his
voice, above the noise of propeller, engine and exhaust, he screamed
a few words of instruction into her ear.

As the girl grasped the significance of his words she paled, but
her lips set in a hard line and her eyes shone with a sudden fire
of  determination as she dropped the plane to within a few feet of
the ground and at the opposite end of the meadow from the blacks
and then at full speed bore down upon the savages. So quickly the
plane came that Usanga's men had no time to escape it after they
realized its menace.  It touched the ground just as it struck among
them and mowed through them, a veritable juggernaut of destruction.
When it came to rest at the edge of the forest the ape-man leaped
quickly to the ground and ran toward the young lieutenant, and as
he went he glanced at the spot where the warriors had stood, ready
to defend himself if necessary, but there was none there to oppose
him. Dead and dying they lay strewn for fifty feet along the turf.

By the time Tarzan had freed the Englishman the girl joined them.
She tried to voice her thanks to the ape-man but he silenced her
with a gesture.

"You saved yourself," he insisted, "for had you been unable to
pilot the plane, I could not have helped you, and now," he said,
"you two have the means of returning to the settlements.  The day
is still young. You can easily cover the distance in a few hours
if you have sufficient petrol." He looked inquiringly toward the
aviator.

Smith-Oldwick nodded his head affirmatively. "I have plenty," he
replied.

"Then go at once," said the ape-man. "Neither of you belong in the
jungle." A slight smile touched his lips as he spoke.

The girl and the Englishman smiled too. "This jungle is no place
for us at least," said Smith-Oldwick, "and it is no place for any
other white man. Why don't you come back to civilization with us?"

Tarzan shook his head. "I prefer the jungle," he said.

The aviator dug his toe into the ground and still looking down,
blurted something which he evidently hated to say.  "If it is a
matter of living, old top," he said, "er--money, er--you know--"

Tarzan laughed. "No," he said. "I know what you are trying to say.
It is not that. I was born in the jungle. I have lived all my life
in the jungle, and I shall die in the jungle.  I do not wish to
live or die elsewhere."

The others shook their heads. They could not understand him.

"Go," said the ape-man. "The quicker you go, the quicker you will
reach safety."

They walked to the plane together. Smith-Oldwick pressed the
ape-man's hand and clambered into the pilot's seat.  "Good-bye,"
said the girl as she extended her hand to Tarzan.  "Before I go
won't you tell me you don't hate me any more?" Tarzan's face clouded.
Without a word he picked her up and lifted her to her place behind
the Englishman. An expression of pain crossed Bertha Kircher's
face. The motor started and a moment later the two were being borne
rapidly toward the east.

In the center of the meadow stood the ape-man watching them. "It
is too bad that she is a German and a spy," he said, "for she is
very hard to hate."




Chapter XIV

The Black Lion


Numa, the lion, was hungry. He had come out of the desert country
to the east into a land of plenty but though he was young and strong,
the wary grass-eaters had managed to elude his mighty talons each
time he had thought to make a kill.

Numa, the lion, was hungry and very savage. For two days he had
not eaten and now he hunted in the ugliest of humors.  No more did
Numa roar forth a rumbling challenge to the world but rather he
moved silent and grim, stepping softly that no cracking twig might
betray his presence to the keen-eared quarry he sought.

Fresh was the spoor of Bara, the deer, that Numa picked up in the
well-beaten game trail he was following. No hour had passed since
Bara had come this way; the time could be measured in minutes and
so the great lion redoubled the cautiousness of his advance as he
crept stealthily in pursuit of his quarry.

A light wind was moving through the jungle aisles, and it wafted
down now to the nostrils of the eager carnivore the strong scent
spoor of the deer, exciting his already avid appetite to a point
where it became a gnawing pain. Yet Numa did not permit himself to
be carried away by his desires into any premature charge such as
had recently lost him the juicy meat of Pacco, the zebra. Increasing
his gait but slightly he followed the tortuous windings of the
trail until suddenly just before him, where the trail wound about
the bole of a huge tree, he saw a young buck moving slowly ahead
of him.

Numa judged the distance with his keen eyes, glowing now like two
terrible spots of yellow fire in his wrinkled, snarling face. He
could do it--this time he was sure. One terrific roar that would
paralyze the poor creature ahead of him into momentary inaction,
and a simultaneous charge of lightning-like rapidity and Numa, the
lion, would feed. The sinuous tail, undulating slowly at its tufted
extremity, whipped suddenly erect. It was the signal for the charge
and the vocal organs were shaped for the thunderous roar when, as
lightning out of a clear sky, Sheeta, the panther, leaped suddenly
into the trail between Numa and the deer.

A blundering charge made Sheeta, for with the first crash of his
spotted body through the foliage verging the trail, Bara gave a
single startled backward glance and was gone.

The roar that was intended to paralyze the deer broke horribly from
the deep throat of the great cat--an angry roar of rage against
the meddling Sheeta who had robbed him of his kill, and the charge
that was intended for Bara was launched against the panther; but
here too Numa was doomed to disappointment, for with the first notes
of his fearsome roar Sheeta, considering well the better part of
valor, leaped into a near-by tree.

A half-hour later it was a thoroughly furious Numa who came
unexpectedly upon the scent of man. Heretofore the lord of the jungle
had disdained the unpalatable flesh of the despised man-thing. Such
meat was only for the old, the toothless, and the decrepit who no
longer could make their kills among the fleet-footed grass-eaters.
Bara, the deer, Horta, the boar, and, best and wariest, Pacco, the
zebra, were for the young, the strong, and the agile, but Numa was
hungry--hungrier than he ever had been in the five short years of
his life.

What if he was a young, powerful, cunning, and ferocious beast?
In the face of hunger, the great leveler, he was as the old, the
toothless, and the decrepit. His belly cried aloud in anguish and
his jowls slavered for flesh. Zebra or deer or man, what mattered
it so that it was warm flesh, red with the hot juices of life?
Even Dango, the hyena, eater of offal, would, at the moment, have
seemed a tidbit to Numa.

The great lion knew the habits and frailties of man, though he never
before had hunted man for food. He knew the despised Gomangani as
the slowest, the most stupid, and the most defenseless of creatures.
No woodcraft, no cunning, no stealth was necessary in the hunting
of man, nor had Numa any stomach for either delay or silence.

His rage had become an almost equally consuming passion with
his hunger, so that now, as his delicate nostrils apprised him of
the recent passage of man, he lowered his head and rumbled forth
a thunderous roar, and at a swift walk, careless of the noise he
made, set forth upon the trail of his intended quarry.

Majestic and terrible, regally careless of his surroundings, the
king of beasts strode down the beaten trail. The natural caution
that is inherent to all creatures of the wild had deserted him.
What had he, lord of the jungle, to fear and, with only man to hunt,
what need of caution? And so he did not see or scent what a more
wary Numa might readily have discovered until, with the cracking of
twigs and a tumbling of earth, he was precipitated into a cunningly
devised pit that the wily Wamabos had excavated for just this
purpose in the center of the game trail.

Tarzan of the Apes stood in the center of the clearing watching the
plane shrinking to diminutive toy-like proportions in the eastern
sky. He had breathed a sigh of relief as he saw it rise safely with
the British flier and Fraulein Bertha Kircher.  For weeks he had
felt the hampering responsibility of their welfare in this savage
wilderness where their utter helplessness would have rendered them
easy prey for the savage carnivores or the cruel Wamabos. Tarzan
of the Apes loved unfettered freedom, and now that these two were
safely off his hands, he felt that he could continue upon his
journey toward the west coast and the long-untenanted cabin of his
dead father.

And yet, as he stood there watching the tiny speck in the east,
another sigh heaved his broad chest, nor was it a sigh of relief,
but rather a sensation which Tarzan had never expected to feel
again and which he now disliked to admit even to himself. It could
not be possible that he, the jungle bred, who had renounced forever
the society of man to return to his beloved beasts of the wilds,
could be feeling anything akin to regret at the departure of these
two, or any slightest loneliness now that they were gone. Lieutenant
Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick Tarzan had liked, but the woman whom he
had known as a German spy he had hated, though he never had found it
in his heart to slay her as he had sworn to slay all Huns. He had
attributed this weakness to the fact that she was a woman, although
he had been rather troubled by the apparent inconsistency of
his hatred for her and his repeated protection of her when danger
threatened.

With an irritable toss of his head he wheeled suddenly toward the
west as though by turning his back upon the fast disappearing plane
he might expunge thoughts of its passengers from his memory. At
the edge of the clearing he paused; a giant tree loomed directly
ahead of him and, as though actuated by sudden and irresistible
impulse, he leaped into the branches and swung himself with apelike
agility to the topmost limbs that would sustain his weight. There,
balancing lightly upon a swaying bough, he sought in the direction
of the eastern horizon for the tiny speck that would be the British
plane bearing away from him the last of his own race and kind that
he expected ever again to see.

At last his keen eyes picked up the ship flying at a considerable
altitude far in the east. For a few seconds he watched it speeding
evenly eastward, when, to his horror, he saw the speck dive suddenly
downward. The fall seemed interminable to the watcher and he
realized how great must have been the altitude of the plane before
the drop commenced. Just before it disappeared from sight its
downward momentum appeared to abate suddenly, but it was still
moving rapidly at a steep angle when it finally disappeared from
view behind the far hills.

For half a minute the ape-man stood noting distant landmarks that
he judged might be in the vicinity of the fallen plane, for no
sooner had he realized that these people were again in trouble than
his inherent sense of duty to his own kind impelled him once more
to forego his plans and seek to aid them.

The ape-man feared from what he judged of the location of the machine
that it had fallen among the almost impassable gorges of the arid
country just beyond the fertile basin that was bounded by the
hills to the east of him. He had crossed that parched and desolate
country of the dead himself and he knew from his own experience
and the narrow escape he had had from succumbing to its relentless
cruelty no lesser man could hope to win his way to safety from
any considerable distance within its borders. Vividly he recalled
the bleached bones of the long-dead warrior in the bottom of the
precipitous gorge that had all but proved a trap for him as well.
He saw the helmet of hammered brass and the corroded breastplate of
steel and the long straight sword in its scabbard and the ancient
harquebus--mute testimonials to the mighty physique and the
warlike spirit of him who had somehow won, thus illy caparisoned
and pitifully armed, to the center of savage, ancient Africa; and
he saw the slender English youth and the slight figure of the girl
cast into the same fateful trap from which this giant of old had
been unable to escape--cast there wounded and broken perhaps, if
not killed.

His judgment told him that the latter possibility was probably
the fact, and yet there was a chance that they might have landed
without fatal injuries, and so upon this slim chance he started out
upon what he knew would be an arduous journey, fraught with many
hardships and unspeakable peril, that he might attempt to save them
if they still lived.

He had covered a mile perhaps when his quick ears caught the sound
of rapid movement along the game trail ahead of him. The sound,
increasing in volume, proclaimed the fact that whatever caused it
was moving in his direction and moving rapidly. Nor was it long
before his trained senses convinced him that the footfalls were
those of Bara, the deer, in rapid flight. Inextricably confused in
Tarzan's character were the attributes of man and of beasts. Long
experience had taught him that he fights best or travels fastest
who is best nourished, and so, with few exceptions, Tarzan could
delay his most urgent business to take advantage of an opportunity
to kill and feed. This perhaps was the predominant beast trait in
him. The transformation from an English gentleman, impelled by the
most humanitarian motives, to that of a wild beast crouching in the
concealment of a dense bush ready to spring upon its approaching
prey, was instantaneous.

And so, when Bara came, escaping the clutches of Numa and Sheeta,
his terror and his haste precluded the possibility of his sensing
that other equally formidable foe lying in ambush for him. Abreast
of the ape-man came the deer; a light-brown body shot from the
concealing verdure of the bush, strong arms encircled the sleek
neck of the young buck and powerful teeth fastened themselves in
the soft flesh. Together the two rolled over in the trail and a
moment later the ape-man rose, and, with one foot upon the carcass
of his kill, raised his voice in the victory cry of the bull ape.

Like an answering challenge came suddenly to the ears of the
ape-man the thunderous roar of a lion, a hideous angry roar in which
Tarzan thought that he discerned a note of surprise and terror. In
the breast of the wild things of the jungle, as in the breasts of
their more enlightened brothers and sisters of the human race, the
characteristic of curiosity is well developed. Nor was Tarzan far
from innocent of it.  The peculiar note in the roar of his hereditary
enemy aroused a desire to investigate, and so, throwing the carcass
of Bara, the deer, across his shoulder, the ape-man took to the
lower terraces of the forest and moved quickly in the direction
from which the sound had come, which was in line with the trail he
had set out upon.

As the distance lessened, the sounds increased in volume, which
indicated that he was approaching a very angry lion and presently,
where a jungle giant overspread the broad game trail that countless
thousands of hoofed and padded feet had worn and trampled into a
deep furrow during perhaps countless ages, he saw beneath him the
lion pit of the Wamabos and in it, leaping futilely for freedom
such a lion as even Tarzan of the Apes never before had beheld. A
mighty beast it was that glared up at the ape-man--large, powerful
and young, with a huge black mane and a coat so much darker than
any Tarzan ever had seen that in the depths of the pit it looked
almost black--a black lion!

Tarzan who had been upon the point of taunting and reviling his
captive foe was suddenly turned to open admiration for the beauty
of the splendid beast. What a creature!  How by comparison the
ordinary forest lion was dwarfed into insignificance! Here indeed
was one worthy to be called king of beasts. With his first sight of
the great cat the ape-man knew that he had heard no note of terror
in that initial roar; surprise doubtless, but the vocal chords of
that mighty throat never had reacted to fear.

With growing admiration came a feeling of quick pity for the hapless
situation of the great brute rendered futile and helpless by the
wiles of the Gomangani. Enemy though the beast was, he was less an
enemy to the ape-man than those blacks who had trapped him, for
though Tarzan of the Apes claimed many fast and loyal friends among
certain tribes of African natives, there were others of degraded
character and bestial habits that he looked upon with utter loathing,
and of such were the human flesh-eaters of Numabo the chief. For
a moment Numa, the lion, glared ferociously at the naked man-thing
upon the tree limb above him. Steadily those yellow-green eyes
bored into the clear eyes of the ape-man, and then the sensitive
nostrils caught the scent of the fresh blood of Bara and the eyes
moved to the carcass lying across the brown shoulder, and there
came from the cavernous depths of the savage throat a low whine.

Tarzan of the Apes smiled. As unmistakably as though a human voice
had spoken, the lion had said to him "I am hungry, even more than
hungry. I am starving," and the ape-man looked down upon the lion
beneath him and smiled, a slow quizzical smile, and then he shifted
the carcass from his shoulder to the branch before him and, drawing
the long blade that had been his father's, deftly cut off a hind
quarter and, wiping the bloody blade upon Bara's smooth coat, he
returned it to its scabbard. Numa, with watering jaws, looked up
at the tempting meat and whined again and the ape-man smiled down
upon him his slow smile and, raising the hind quarter in his strong
brown hands buried his teeth in the tender, juicy flesh.

For the third time Numa, the lion, uttered that low pleading whine
and then, with a rueful and disgusted shake of his head, Tarzan of
the Apes raised the balance of the carcass of Bara, the deer, and
hurled it to the famished beast below.

"Old woman," muttered the ape-man. "Tarzan has become a weak old
woman. Presently he would shed tears because he has killed Bara,
the deer. He cannot see Numa, his enemy, go hungry, because Tarzan's
heart is turning to water by contact with the soft, weak creatures
of civilization." But yet he smiled, nor was he sorry that he had
given way to the dictates of a kindly impulse.

As Tarzan tore the flesh from that portion of the kill he had retained
for himself his eyes were taking in each detail of the scene below.
He saw the avidity with which Numa devoured the carcass; he noted
with growing admiration the finer points of the beast, and also
the cunning construction of the trap.  The ordinary lion pit with
which Tarzan was familiar had stakes imbedded in the bottom, upon
whose sharpened points the hapless lion would be impaled, but this
pit was not so made. Here the short stakes were set at intervals of
about a foot around the walls near the top, their sharpened points
inclining downward so that the lion had fallen unhurt into the trap
but could not leap out because each time he essayed it his head
came in contact with the sharp end of a stake above him.

Evidently, then, the purpose of the Wamabos was to capture a lion
alive. As this tribe had no contact whatsoever with white men in
so far as Tarzan knew, their motive was doubtless due to a desire
to torture the beast to death that they might enjoy to the utmost
his dying agonies.

Having fed the lion, it presently occurred to Tarzan that his act
would be futile were he to leave the beast to the mercies of the
blacks, and then too it occurred to him that he could derive more
pleasure through causing the blacks discomfiture than by leaving
Numa to his fate. But how was he to release him? By removing two
stakes there would be left plenty of room for the lion to leap from
the pit, which was not of any great depth. However, what assurance
had Tarzan that Numa would not leap out instantly the way to
freedom was open, and before the ape-man could gain the safety of
the trees?  Regardless of the fact that Tarzan felt no such fear
of the lion as you and I might experience under like circumstances,
he yet was imbued with the sense of caution that is necessary to
all creatures of the wild if they are to survive. Should necessity
require, Tarzan could face Numa in battle, although he was not so
egotistical as to think that he could best a full-grown lion in
mortal combat other than through accident or the utilization of the
cunning of his superior man-mind. To lay himself liable to death
futilely, he would have considered as reprehensible as to have
shunned danger in time of necessity; but when Tarzan elected to do
a thing he usually found the means to accomplish it.

He had now fully determined to liberate Numa, and having so determined,
he would accomplish it even though it entailed considerable personal
risk. He knew that the lion would be occupied with his feeding for
some time, but he also knew that while feeding he would be doubly
resentful of any fancied interference. Therefore Tarzan must work
with caution.

Coming to the ground at the side of the pit, he examined the stakes
and as he did so was rather surprised to note that Numa gave no
evidence of anger at his approach. Once he turned a searching gaze
upon the ape-man for a moment and then returned to the flesh of
Bara. Tarzan felt of the stakes and tested them with his weight.
He pulled upon them with the muscles of his strong arms, presently
discovering that by working them back and forth he could loosen
them: and then a new plan was suggested to him so that he fell to
work excavating with his knife at a point above where one of the
stakes was imbedded. The loam was soft and easily removed, and it
was not long until Tarzan had exposed that part of one of the stakes
which was imbedded in the wall of the pit to almost its entire
length, leaving only enough imbedded to prevent the stake from
falling into the excavation. Then he turned his attention to an
adjoining stake and soon had it similarly exposed, after which he
threw the noose of his grass rope over the two and swung quickly
to the branch of the tree above.  Here he gathered in the slack of
the rope and, bracing himself against the bole of the tree, pulled
steadily upward. Slowly the stakes rose from the trench in which
they were imbedded and with them rose Numa's suspicion and growling.

Was this some new encroachment upon his rights and his liberties?
He was puzzled and, like all lions, being short of temper, he
was irritated. He had not minded it when the Tarmangani squatted
upon the verge of the pit and looked down upon him, for had not
this Tarmangani fed him? But now something else was afoot and the
suspicion of the wild beast was aroused. As he watched, however,
Numa saw the stakes rise slowly to an erect position, tumble
against each other and then fall backwards out of his sight upon
the surface of the ground above. Instantly the lion grasped the
possibilities of the situation, and, too, perhaps he sensed the fact
that the man-thing had deliberately opened a way for his escape.
Seizing the remains of Bara in his great jaws, Numa, the lion,
leaped agilely from the pit of the Wamabos and Tarzan of the Apes
melted into the jungles to the east.

On the surface of the ground or through the swaying branches of the
trees the spoor of man or beast was an open book to the ape-man, but
even his acute senses were baffled by the spoorless trail of the
airship. Of what good were eyes, or ears, or the sense of smell
in following a thing whose path had lain through the shifting
air thousands of feet above the tree tops? Only upon his sense of
direction could Tarzan depend in his search for the fallen plane.
He could not even judge accurately as to the distance it might
lie from him, and he knew that from the moment that it disappeared
beyond the hills it might have traveled a considerable distance at
right angles to its original course before it crashed to earth. If
its occupants were killed or badly injured the ape-man might search
futilely in their immediate vicinity for some time before finding
them.

There was but one thing to do and that was to travel to a point
as close as possible to where he judged the plane had landed, and
then to follow in ever-widening circles until he picked up their
scent spoor. And this he did.

Before he left the valley of plenty he made several kills and
carried the choicest cuts of meat with him, leaving all the dead
weight of bones behind. The dense vegetation of the jungle terminated
at the foot of the western slope, growing less and less abundant
as he neared the summit beyond which was a sparse growth of sickly
scrub and sunburned grasses, with here and there a gnarled and hardy
tree that had withstood the vicissitudes of an almost waterless
existence.

From the summit of the hills Tarzan's keen eyes searched the arid
landscape before him. In the distance he discerned the ragged
tortuous lines that marked the winding course of the hideous gorges
which scored the broad plain at intervals--the terrible gorges that
had so nearly claimed his life in punishment for his temerity in
attempting to invade the sanctity of their ancient solitude.

For two days Tarzan sought futilely for some clew to the whereabouts
of the machine or its occupants. He cached portions of his kills at
different points, building cairns of rock to mark their locations.
He crossed the first deep gorge and circled far beyond it. Occasionally
he stopped and called aloud, listening for some response but
only silence rewarded him--a sinister silence that his cries only
accentuated.

Late in the evening of the second day he came to the well-remembered
gorge in which lay the clean-picked bones of the ancient adventurer,
and here, for the first time, Ska, the vulture, picked up his trail.
"Not this time, Ska," cried the ape-man in a taunting voice, "for
now indeed is Tarzan Tarzan.  Before, you stalked the grim skeleton
of a Tarmangani and even then you lost. Waste not your time upon
Tarzan of the Apes in the full of his strength."  But still Ska, the
vulture, circled and soared above him, and the ape-man, notwithstanding
his boasts, felt a shudder of apprehension. Through his brain ran
a persistent and doleful chant to which he involuntarily set two
words, repeated over and over again in horrible monotony: "Ska
knows! Ska knows!" until, shaking himself in anger, he picked up
a rock and hurled it at the grim scavenger.

Lowering himself over the precipitous side of the gorge Tarzan half
clambered and half slid to the sandy floor beneath.  He had come
upon the rift at almost the exact spot at which he had clambered
from it weeks before, and there he saw, just as he had left it,
just, doubtless, as it had lain for centuries, the mighty skeleton
and its mighty armor.

As he stood looking down upon this grim reminder that another man
of might had succumbed to the cruel powers of the desert, he was
brought to startled attention by the report of a firearm, the sound
of which came from the depths of the gorge to the south of him,
and reverberated along the steep walls of the narrow rift.




Chapter XV

Mysterious Footprints


As the British plane piloted by Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick
rose above the jungle wilderness where Bertha Kircher's life had
so often been upon the point of extinction, and sped toward the
east, the girl felt a sudden contraction of the muscles of her
throat. She tried very hard to swallow something that was not there.
It seemed strange to her that she should feel regret in leaving
behind her such hideous perils, and yet it was plain to her that
such was the fact, for she was also leaving behind something beside
the dangers that had menaced her--a unique figure that had entered
her life, and for which she felt an unaccountable attraction.

Before her in the pilot's seat sat an English officer and gentleman
whom, she knew, loved her, and yet she dared to feel regret in his
company at leaving the stamping ground of a wild beast!

Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick, on his part, was in the seventh heaven
of elation. He was in possession again of his beloved ship, he was
flying swiftly in the direction of his comrades and his duty, and
with him was the woman he loved. The fly in the ointment, however,
was the accusation Tarzan had made against this woman. He had said
that she was a German, and a spy, and from the heights of bliss the
English officer was occasionally plunged to the depths of despair
in contemplation of the inevitable, were the ape-man's charges to
prove true. He found himself torn between sentiments of love and
honor. On the one hand he could not surrender the woman he loved
to the certain fate that must be meted out to her if she were in
truth an enemy spy, while on the other it would be equally impossible
for him as an Englishman and an officer to give her aid or protection.

The young man contented himself therefore with repeated mental
denials of her guilt. He tried to convince himself that Tarzan was
mistaken, and when he conjured upon the screen of recollection the
face of the girl behind him, he was doubly reassured that those
lines of sweet femininity and character, those clear and honest
eyes, could not belong to one of the hated alien race.

And so they sped toward the east, each wrapped in his own thoughts.
Below them they saw the dense vegetation of the jungle give place
to the scantier growth upon the hillside, and then before them
there spread the wide expanse of arid wastelands marked by the deep
scarring of the narrow gorges that long-gone rivers had cut there
in some forgotten age.

Shortly after they passed the summit of the ridge which formed
the boundary between the desert and the fertile country, Ska, the
vulture, winging his way at a high altitude toward his aerie, caught
sight of a strange new bird of gigantic proportions encroaching upon
the preserves of his aerial domain.  Whether with intent to give
battle to the interloper or merely impelled by curiosity, Ska rose
suddenly upward to meet the plane. Doubtless he misjudged the speed
of the newcomer, but be that as it may, the tip of the propeller
blade touched him and simultaneously many things happened. The
lifeless body of Ska, torn and bleeding, dropped plummet-like toward
the ground; a bit of splintered spruce drove backward to strike
the pilot on the forehead; the plane shuddered and trembled and
as Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick sank forward in momentary
unconsciousness the ship dived headlong toward the earth.

Only for an instant was the pilot unconscious, but that instant
almost proved their undoing. When he awoke to a realization of
their peril it was also to discover that his motor had stalled.
The plane had attained frightful momentum, and the ground seemed
too close for him to hope to flatten out in time to make a safe
landing. Directly beneath him was a deep rift in the plateau, a
narrow gorge, the bottom of which appeared comparatively level and
sand covered.

In the brief instant in which he must reach a decision, the safest
plan seemed to attempt a landing in the gorge, and this he did, but
not without considerable damage to the plane and a severe shaking-up
for himself and his passenger.

Fortunately neither of them was injured but their condition seemed
indeed a hopeless one. It was a grave question as to whether the
man could repair his plane and continue the journey, and it seemed
equally questionable as to their ability either to proceed on foot
to the coast or retrace their way to the country they had just
left. The man was confident that they could not hope to cross the
desert country to the east in the face of thirst and hunger, while
behind them in the valley of plenty lay almost equal danger in the
form of carnivores and the warlike natives.

After the plane came to its sudden and disastrous stop, Smith-Oldwick
turned quickly to see what the effect of the accident had been on
the girl. He found her pale but smiling, and for several seconds
the two sat looking at each other in silence.

"This is the end?" the girl asked.

The Englishman shook his head. "It is the end of the first leg,
anyway," he replied.

"But you can't hope to make repairs here," she said dubiously.

"No," he said, "not if they amount to anything, but I may be able
to patch it up. I will have to look her over a bit first.  Let us
hope there is nothing serious. It's a long, long way to the Tanga
railway."

"We would not get far," said the girl, a slight note of hopelessness
in her tone. "Entirely unarmed as we are, it would be little less
than a miracle if we covered even a small fraction of the distance."

"But we are not unarmed," replied the man. "I have an extra pistol
here, that the beggars didn't discover," and, removing the cover
of a compartment, he drew forth an automatic.

Bertha Kircher leaned back in her seat and laughed aloud, a mirthless,
half-hysterical laugh. "That popgun!" she exclaimed. "What earthly
good would it do other than to infuriate any beast of prey you
might happen to hit with it?"

Smith-Oldwick looked rather crestfallen. "But it is a weapon," he
said. "You will have to admit that, and certainly I could kill a
man with it."

"You could if you happened to hit him," said the girl, "or the
thing didn't jam. Really, I haven't much faith in an automatic. I
have used them myself."

"Oh, of course," he said ironically, "an express rifle would be
better, for who knows but we might meet an elephant here in the
desert."

The girl saw that he was hurt, and she was sorry, for she realized
that there was nothing he would not do in her service or protection,
and that it was through no fault of his that he was so illy armed.
Doubtless, too, he realized as well as she the futility of his
weapon, and that he had only called attention to it in the hope of
reassuring her and lessening her anxiety.

"Forgive me," she said. "I did not mean to be nasty, but this
accident is the proverbial last straw. It seems to me that I have
borne all that I can. Though I was willing to give my life in the
service of my country, I did not imagine that my death agonies would
be so long drawn out, for I realize now that I have been dying for
many weeks."

"What do you mean!" he exclaimed; "what do you mean by that! You
are not dying. There is nothing the matter with you."

"Oh, not that," she said, "I did not mean that. What I mean is that
at the moment the black sergeant, Usanga, and his renegade German
native troops captured me and brought me inland, my death warrant
was signed. Sometimes I have imagined that a reprieve has been
granted. Sometimes I have hoped that I might be upon the verge of
winning a full pardon, but really in the depths of my heart I have
known that I should never live to regain civilization. I have done
my bit for my country, and though it was not much I can at least
go with the realization that it was the best I was able to offer.
All that I can hope for now, all that I ask for, is a speedy
fulfillment of the death sentence. I do not wish to linger any more
to face constant terror and apprehension. Even physical torture
would be preferable to what I have passed through. I have no doubt
that you consider me a brave woman, but really my terror has been
boundless. The cries of the carnivores at night fill me with a dread
so tangible that I am in actual pain. I feel the rending talons
in my flesh and the cruel fangs munching upon my bones--it is as
real to me as though I were actually enduring the horrors of such
a death. I doubt if you can understand it--men are so different."

"Yes," he said, "I think I can understand it, and because I understand
I can appreciate more than you imagine the heroism you have shown
in your endurance of all that you have passed through. There can
be no bravery where there is no fear. A child might walk into a
lion's den, but it would take a very brave man to go to its rescue."

"Thank you," she said, "but I am not brave at all, and now I am
very much ashamed of my thoughtlessness for your own feelings. I
will try and take a new grip upon myself and we will both hope for
the best. I will help you all I can if you will tell me what I may
do."

"The first thing," he replied, "is to find out just how serious
our damage is, and then to see what we can do in the way of repairs."

For two days Smith-Oldwick worked upon the damaged plane--worked
in the face of the fact that from the first he realized the case
was hopeless. And at last he told her.

"I knew it," she said, "but I believe that I felt much as you must
have; that however futile our efforts here might be, it would be
infinitely as fatal to attempt to retrace our way to the jungle we
just left or to go on toward the coast. You know and I know that we
could not reach the Tanga railway on foot.  We should die of thirst
and starvation before we had covered half the distance, and if we
return to the jungle, even were we able to reach it, it would be
but to court an equally certain, though different, fate."

"So we might as well sit here and wait for death as to uselessly
waste our energies in what we know would be a futile attempt at
escape?" he asked.

"No," she replied, "I shall never give up like that. What I meant
was that it was useless to attempt to reach either of the places
where we know that there is food and water in abundance, so we
must strike out in a new direction. Somewhere there may be water
in this wilderness and if there is, the best chance of our finding
it would be to follow this gorge downward. We have enough food and
water left, if we are careful of it, for a couple of days and in
that time we might stumble upon a spring or possibly even reach
the fertile country which I know lies to the south. When Usanga
brought me to the Wamabo country from the coast he took a southerly
route along which there was usually water and game in plenty. It
was not until we neared our destination that the country became
overrun with carnivores. So there is hope if we can reach the
fertile country south of us that we can manage to pull through to
the coast."

The man shook his head dubiously. "We can try it," he said.
"Personally, I do not fancy sitting here waiting for death."

Smith-Oldwick was leaning against the ship, his dejected gaze
directed upon the ground at his feet. The girl was looking south
down the gorge in the direction of their one slender chance of
life. Suddenly she touched him on the arm.

"Look," she whispered.

The man raised his eyes quickly in the direction of her gaze to
see the massive head of a great lion who was regarding them from
beyond a rocky projection at the first turning of the gorge.

"Phew!" he exclaimed, "the beggars are everywhere."

"They do not go far from water do they," asked the girl hopefully.

"I should imagine not," he replied; "a lion is not particularly
strong on endurance."

"Then he is a harbinger of hope," she exclaimed.

The man laughed. "Cute little harbinger of hope!" he said.  "Reminds
me of Cock Robin heralding spring."

The girl cast a quick glance at him. "Don't be silly, and I don't
care if you do laugh. He fills me with hope."

"It is probably mutual," replied Smith-Oldwick, "as we doubtless
fill him with hope."

The lion evidently having satisfied himself as to the nature of
the creatures before him advanced slowly now in their direction.

"Come," said the man, "let's climb aboard," and he helped the girl
over the side of the ship.

"Can't he get in here?" she asked.

"I think he can," said the man.

"You are reassuring," she returned.

"I don't feel so." He drew his pistol.

"For heaven's sake," she cried, "don't shoot at him with that thing.
You might hit him."

"I don't intend to shoot at him but I might succeed in frightening
him away if he attempts to reach us here. Haven't you ever seen a
trainer work with lions? He carries a silly little pop-gun loaded
with blank cartridges. With that and a kitchen chair he subdues
the most ferocious of beasts."

"But you haven't a kitchen chair," she reminded him.

"No," he said, "Government is always muddling things. I have always
maintained that airplanes should be equipped with kitchen chairs."

Bertha Kircher laughed as evenly and with as little hysteria as
though she were moved by the small talk of an afternoon tea.

Numa, the lion, came steadily toward them; his attitude seemed
more that of curiosity than of belligerency. Close to the side of
the ship he stopped and stood gazing up at them.

"Magnificent, isn't he?" exclaimed the man.

"I never saw a more beautiful creature," she replied, "nor one with
such a dark coat. Why, he is almost black."

The sound of their voices seemed not to please the lord of the
jungle, for he suddenly wrinkled his great face into deep furrows
as he bared his fangs beneath snarling lips and gave vent to an
angry growl. Almost simultaneously he crouched for a spring and
immediately Smith-Oldwick discharged his pistol into the ground in
front of the lion. The effect of the noise upon Numa seemed but to
enrage him further, and with a horrid roar he sprang for the author
of the new and disquieting sound that had outraged his ears.

Simultaneously Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick vaulted nimbly
out of the cockpit on the opposite side of his plane, calling to
the girl to follow his example. The girl, realizing the futility
of leaping to the ground, chose the remaining alternative and
clambered to the top of the upper plane.

Numa, unaccustomed to the idiosyncrasies of construction of an
airship and having gained the forward cockpit, watched the girl
clamber out of his reach without at first endeavoring to prevent
her. Having taken possession of the plane his anger seemed suddenly
to leave him and he made no immediate move toward following
Smith-Oldwick. The girl, realizing the comparative safety of her
position, had crawled to the outer edge of the wing and was calling
to the man to try and reach the opposite end of the upper plane.

It was this scene upon which Tarzan of the Apes looked as he
rounded the bend of the gorge above the plane after the pistol shot
had attracted his attention. The girl was so intent upon watching
the efforts of the Englishman to reach a place of safety, and the
latter was so busily occupied in attempting to do so that neither
at once noticed the silent approach of the ape-man.

It was Numa who first noticed the intruder. The lion immediately
evinced his displeasure by directing toward him a snarling countenance
and a series of warning growls. His action called the attention of
the two upon the upper plane to the newcomer, eliciting a stifled
"Thank God!" from the girl, even though she could scarce credit the
evidence of her own eyes that it was indeed the savage man, whose
presence always assured her safety, who had come so providentially
in the nick of time.

Almost immediately both were horrified to see Numa leap from the
cockpit and advance upon Tarzan. The ape-man, carrying his stout
spear in readiness, moved deliberately onward to meet the carnivore,
which he had recognized as the lion of the Wamabos' pit. He knew
from the manner of Numa's approach what neither Bertha Kircher nor
Smith-Oldwick knew--that there was more of curiosity than belligerency
in it, and he wondered if in that great head there might not be a
semblance of gratitude for the kindness that Tarzan had done him.

There was no question in Tarzan's mind but that Numa recognized
him, for he knew his fellows of the jungle well enough to know that
while they oft-times forgot certain sensations more quickly than
man there are others which remain in their memories for years. A
well-defined scent spoor might never be forgotten by a beast if it
had first been sensed under unusual circumstances, and so Tarzan
was confident that Numa's nose had already reminded him of all the
circumstances of their brief connection.

Love of the sporting chance is inherent in the Anglo-Saxon race and
it was not now Tarzan of the Apes but rather John Clayton, Lord
Greystoke, who smilingly welcomed the sporting chance which he must
take to discover how far-reaching was Numa's gratitude.

Smith-Oldwick and the girl saw the two nearing each other.  The
former swore softly beneath his breath while he nervously fingered
the pitiful weapon at his hip. The girl pressed her open palms to
her cheeks as she leaned forward in stony-eyed, horror-stricken
silence. While she had every confidence in the prowess of the godlike
creature who thus dared brazenly to face the king of beasts, she
had no false conception of what must certainly happen when they
met. She had seen Tarzan battle with Sheeta, the panther, and she
had realized then that powerful as the man was, it was only agility,
cunning, and chance that placed him upon anywhere near an equal
footing with his savage adversary, and that of the three factors
upon his side chance was the greatest.

She saw the man and the lion stop simultaneously, not more than
a yard apart. She saw the beast's tail whipping from side to side
and she could hear his deep-throated growls rumbling from his
cavernous breast, but she could read correctly neither the movement
of the lashing tail nor the notes of the growl.

To her they seemed to indicate nothing but bestial rage while to
Tarzan of the Apes they were conciliatory and reassuring in the
extreme. And then she saw Numa move forward again until his nose
touched the man's naked leg and she closed her eyes and covered
them with her palms. For what seemed an eternity she waited for
the horrid sound of the conflict which she knew must come, but all
she heard was an explosive sigh of relief from Smith-Oldwick and
a half-hysterical "By Jove! Just fancy it!"

She looked up to see the great lion rubbing his shaggy head against
the man's hip, and Tarzan's free hand entangled in the black mane
as he scratched Numa, the lion, behind a back-laid ear.

Strange friendships are often formed between the lower animals
of different species, but less often between man and the savage
felidae, because of the former's inherent fear of the great cats.
And so after all, therefore, the friendship so suddenly developed
between the savage lion and the savage man was not inexplicable.

As Tarzan approached the plane Numa walked at his side, and when
Tarzan stopped and looked up at the girl and the man Numa stopped
also.

"I had about given up hope of finding you," said the ape-man, "and
it is evident that I found you just in time."

"But how did you know we were in trouble?" asked the English officer.

"I saw your plane fall," replied Tarzan. "I was watching you from
a tree beside the clearing where you took off. I didn't have much
to locate you by other than the general direction, but it seems
that you volplaned a considerable distance toward the south after
you disappeared from my view behind the hills. I have been looking
for you further toward the north. I was just about to turn back
when I heard your pistol shot. Is your ship beyond repair?"

"Yes," replied Smith-Oldwick, "it is hopeless."

"What are your plans, then? What do you wish to do?" Tarzan directed
his question to the girl.

"We want to reach the coast," she said, "but it seems impossible
now."

"I should have thought so a little while ago," replied the ape-man,
"but if Numa is here there must be water within a reasonable
distance. I ran across this lion two days ago in the Wamabo country.
I liberated him from one of their pits. To have reached this spot
he must have come by some trail unknown to me--at least I crossed
no game trail and no spoor of any animal after I came over the hills
out of the fertile country.  From which direction did he come upon
you?"

"It was from the south," replied the girl. "We thought, too, that
there must be water in that direction."

"Let's find out then," said Tarzan.

"But how about the lion?" asked Smith-Oldwick.

"That we will have to discover," replied the ape-man, "and we can
only do so if you will come down from your perch."

The officer shrugged his shoulders. The girl turned her gaze upon
him to note the effect of Tarzan's proposal. The Englishman grew
suddenly very white, but there was a smile upon his lips as without
a word he slipped over the edge of the plane and clambered to the
ground behind Tarzan.

Bertha Kircher realized that the man was afraid nor did she blame
him, and she also realized the remarkable courage that he had shown
in thus facing a danger that was very real to him.

Numa standing close to Tarzan's side raised his head and glared at
the young Englishman, growled once, and looked up at the ape-man.
Tarzan retained a hold upon the beast's mane and spoke to him in
the language of the great apes. To the girl and Smith-Oldwick the
growling gutturals falling from human lips sounded uncanny in the
extreme, but whether Numa understood them or not they appeared to
have the desired effect upon him, as he ceased growling, and as
Tarzan walked to Smith-Oldwick's side Numa accompanied him, nor
did he offer to molest the officer.

"What did you say to him?" asked the girl.

Tarzan smiled. "I told him," he replied, "that I am Tarzan of the
Apes, mighty hunter, killer of beasts, lord of the jungle, and that
you are my friends. I have never been sure that all of the other
beasts understand the language of the Mangani. I know that Manu,
the monkey, speaks nearly the same tongue and I am sure that Tantor,
the elephant, understands all that I say to him. We of the jungle
are great boasters. In our speech, in our carriage, in every detail
of our demeanor we must impress others with our physical power and
our ferocity.  That is why we growl at our enemies. We are telling
them to beware or we shall fall upon them and tear them to pieces.
Perhaps Numa does not understand the words that I use but I believe
that my tones and my manner carry the impression that I wish them
to convey. Now you may come down and be introduced."

It required all the courage that Bertha Kircher possessed to lower
herself to the ground within reach of the talons and fangs of this
untamed forest beast, but she did it. Nor did Numa do more than
bare his teeth and growl a little as she came close to the ape-man.

"I think you are safe from him as long as I am present," said the
ape-man. "The best thing to do is simply to ignore him.  Make no
advances, but be sure to give no indication of fear and, if possible
always keep me between you and him. He will go away presently I am
sure and the chances are that we shall not see him again."

At Tarzan's suggestion Smith-Oldwick removed the remaining water
and provisions from the plane and, distributing the burden among
them, they set off toward the south. Numa did not follow them, but
stood by the plane watching until they finally disappeared from
view around a bend in the gorge.

Tarzan had picked up Numa's trail with the intention of following
it southward in the belief that it would lead to water.  In the sand
that floored the bottom of the gorge tracks were plain and easily
followed. At first only the fresh tracks of Numa were visible, but
later in the day the ape-man discovered the older tracks of other
lions and just before dark he stopped suddenly in evident surprise.
His two companions looked at him questioningly, and in answer to
their implied interrogations he pointed at the ground directly in
front of him.

"Look at those," he exclaimed.

At first neither Smith-Oldwick nor the girl saw anything but a
confusion of intermingled prints of padded feet in the sand, but
presently the girl discovered what Tarzan had seen, and an exclamation
of surprise broke from her lips.

"The imprint of human feet!" she cried.

Tarzan nodded.

"But there are no toes," the girl pointed out.

"The feet were shod with a soft sandal," explained Tarzan.

"Then there must be a native village somewhere in the vicinity,"
said Smith-Oldwick.

"Yes," replied the ape-man, "but not the sort of natives which we
would expect to find here in this part of Africa where others all
go unshod with the exception of a few of Usanga's renegade German
native troops who wear German army shoes. I don't know that you can
notice it, but it is evident to me that the foot inside the sandal
that made these imprints were not the foot of a Negro. If you will
examine them carefully you will notice that the impression of the
heel and ball of the foot are well marked even through the sole of
the sandal. The weight comes more nearly in the center of a Negro's
footprint."

"Then you think these were made by a white person?"

"It looks that way," replied Tarzan, and suddenly, to the surprise
of both the girl and Smith-Oldwick, he dropped to his hands and
knees and sniffed at the tracks--again a beast utilizing the senses
and woodcraft of a beast. Over an area of several square yards his
keen nostrils sought the identity of the makers of the tracks. At
length he rose to his feet.

"It is not the spoor of the Gomangani," he said, "nor is it exactly
like that of white men. There were three who came this way. They
were men, but of what race I do not know."

There was no apparent change in the nature of the gorge except that
it had steadily grown deeper as they followed it downward until now
the rocky and precipitous sides rose far above them. At different
points natural caves, which appeared to have been eroded by the action
of water in some forgotten age, pitted the side walls at various
heights. Near them was such a cavity at the ground's level--an
arched cavern floored with white sand. Tarzan indicated it with a
gesture of his hand.

"We will lair here tonight," he said, and then with one of his
rare, slow smiles: "We will CAMP here tonight."

Having eaten their meager supper Tarzan bade the girl enter the
cavern.

"You will sleep inside," he said. "The lieutenant and I will lie
outside at the entrance."




Chapter XVI

The Night Attack


As the girl turned to bid them good night, she thought that she
saw a shadowy form moving in the darkness beyond them, and almost
simultaneously she was sure that she heard the sounds of stealthy
movement in the same direction.

"What is that?" she whispered. "There is something out there in
the darkness."

"Yes," replied Tarzan, "it is a lion. It has been there for some
time. Hadn't you noticed it before?"

"Oh!" cried the girl, breathing a sigh of relief, "is it our lion?"

"No," said Tarzan, "it is not our lion; it is another lion and he
is hunting."

"He is stalking us?" asked the girl.

"He is," replied the ape-man. Smith-Oldwick fingered the grip of
his pistol.

Tarzan saw the involuntary movement and shook his head.

"Leave that thing where it is, Lieutenant," he said.

The officer laughed nervously. "I couldn't help it, you know, old
man," he said; "instinct of self-preservation and all that."

"It would prove an instinct of self-destruction," said Tarzan.
"There are at least three hunting lions out there watching us.  If
we had a fire or the moon were up you would see their eyes plainly.
Presently they may come after us but the chances are that they will
not. If you are very anxious that they should, fire your pistol
and hit one of them."

"What if they do charge?" asked the girl; "there is no means of
escape."

"Why, we should have to fight them," replied Tarzan.

"What chance would we three have against them?" asked the girl.

The ape-man shrugged his shoulders. "One must die sometime," he
said. "To you doubtless it may seem terrible--such a death; but
Tarzan of the Apes has always expected to go out in some such way.
Few of us die of old age in the jungle, nor should I care to die
thus. Some day Numa will get me, or Sheeta, or a black warrior.
These or some of the others. What difference does it make which
it is, or whether it comes tonight or next year or in ten years?
After it is over it will be all the same."

The girl shuddered. "Yes," she said in a dull, hopeless voice,
"after it is over it will be all the same."

Then she went into the cavern and lay down upon the sand.  Smith-Oldwick
sat in the entrance and leaned against the cliff.  Tarzan squatted
on the opposite side.

"May I smoke?" questioned the officer of Tarzan. "I have been
hoarding a few cigarettes and if it won't attract those bouncers
out there I would like to have one last smoke before I cash in.
Will you join me?" and he proffered the ape-man a cigarette.

"No, thanks," said Tarzan, "but it will be all right if you smoke.
No wild animal is particularly fond of the fumes of tobacco so it
certainly won't entice them any closer."

Smith-Oldwick lighted his cigarette and sat puffing slowly upon
it. He had proffered one to the girl but she had refused, and thus
they sat in silence for some time, the silence of the night ruffled
occasionally by the faint crunching of padded feet upon the soft
sands of the gorge's floor.

It was Smith-Oldwick who broke the silence. "Aren't they unusually
quiet for lions?" he asked.

"No," replied the ape-man; "the lion that goes roaring around the
jungle does not do it to attract prey. They are very quiet when
they are stalking their quarry."

"I wish they would roar," said the officer. "I wish they would
do anything, even charge. Just knowing that they are there and
occasionally seeing something like a shadow in the darkness and the
faint sounds that come to us from them are getting on my nerves.
But I hope," he said, "that all three don't charge at once."

"Three?" said Tarzan. "There are seven of them out there now."

"Good Lord! exclaimed Smith-Oldwick.

"Couldn't we build a fire," asked the girl, "and frighten them
away?"

"I don't know that it would do any good," said Tarzan, "as I have
an idea that these lions are a little different from any that we
are familiar with and possibly for the same reason which at first
puzzled me a little--I refer to the apparent docility in the
presence of a man of the lion who was with us today. A man is out
there now with those lions."

"It is impossible!" exclaimed Smith-Oldwick. "They would tear him
to pieces."

"What makes you think there is a man there?" asked the girl.

Tarzan smiled and shook his head. "I am afraid you would not
understand," he replied. "It is difficult for us to understand
anything that is beyond our own powers."

"What do you mean by that?" asked the officer.

"Well," said Tarzan, "if you had been born without eyes you could
not understand sense impressions that the eyes of others transmit
to their brains, and as you have both been born without any sense
of smell I am afraid you cannot understand how I can know that
there is a man there."

"You mean that you scent a man?" asked the girl.

Tarzan nodded affirmatively.

"And in the same way you know the number of lions?" asked the man.

"Yes," said Tarzan. "No two lions look alike, no two have the same
scent."

The young Englishman shook his head. "No," he said, "I cannot
understand."

"I doubt if the lions or the man are here necessarily for the purpose
of harming us," said Tarzan, "because there has been nothing to
prevent their doing so long before had they wished to. I have a
theory, but it is utterly preposterous."

"What is it?" asked the girl.

"I think they are here," replied Tarzan, "to prevent us from going
some place that they do not wish us to go; in other words we are
under surveillance, and possibly as long as we don't go where we
are not wanted we shall not be bothered."

"But how are we to know where they don't want us to go?" asked
Smith-Oldwick.

"We can't know," replied Tarzan, "and the chances are that the very
place we are seeking is the place they don't wish us to trespass
on."

"You mean the water?" asked the girl.

"Yes," replied Tarzan.

For some time they sat in silence which was broken only by an
occasional sound of movement from the outer darkness. It must have
been an hour later that the ape-man rose quietly and drew his long
blade from its sheath. Smith-Oldwick was dozing against the rocky
wall of the cavern entrance, while the girl, exhausted by the
excitement and fatigue of the day, had fallen into deep slumber. An
instant after Tarzan arose, Smith-Oldwick and the girl were aroused
by a volley of thunderous roars and the noise of many padded feet
rushing toward them.

Tarzan of the Apes stood directly before the entrance to the cavern,
his knife in his hand, awaiting the charge. The ape-man had not
expected any such concerted action as he now realized had been taken
by those watching them. He had known for some time that other men
had joined those who were with the lions earlier in the evening,
and when he arose to his feet it was because he knew that the lions
and the men were moving cautiously closer to him and his party.
He might easily have eluded them, for he had seen that the face of
the cliff rising above the mouth of the cavern might be scaled by
as good a climber as himself. It might have been wiser had he tried
to escape, for he knew that in the face of such odds even he was
helpless, but he stood his ground though I doubt if he could have
told why.

He owed nothing either of duty or friendship to the girl sleeping
in the cavern, nor could he longer be of any protection to her or
her companion. Yet something held him there in futile self-sacrifice.

The great Tarmangani had not even the satisfaction of striking a
blow in self-defense. A veritable avalanche of savage beasts rolled
over him and threw him heavily to the ground.  In falling his head
struck the rocky surface of the cliff, stunning him.

It was daylight when he regained consciousness. The first dim
impression borne to his awakening mind was a confusion of savage
sounds which gradually resolved themselves into the growling
of lions, and then, little by little, there came back to him the
recollections of what had preceded the blow that had felled him.

Strong in his nostrils was the scent of Numa, the lion, and against
one naked leg he could feel the coat of some animal.  Slowly Tarzan
opened his eyes. He was lying on his side and as he looked down his
body, he saw that a great lion stood straddling him--a great lion
who growled hideously at something which Tarzan could not see.

With the full return of his senses Tarzan's nose told him that the
beast above him was Numa of the Wamabo pit.

Thus reassured, the ape-man spoke to the lion and at the same time
made a motion as though he would arise. Immediately Numa stepped
from above him. As Tarzan raised his head, he saw that he still
lay where he had fallen before the opening of the cliff where the
girl had been sleeping and that Numa, backed against the cliffside,
was apparently defending him from two other lions who paced to and
fro a short distance from their intended victim.

And then Tarzan turned his eyes into the cave and saw that the girl
and Smith-Oldwick were gone.

His efforts had been for naught. With an angry toss of his head,
the ape-man turned upon the two lions who had continued to pace
back and forth a few yards from him. Numa of the lion pit turned a
friendly glance in Tarzan's direction, rubbed his head against the
ape-man's side, and then directed his snarling countenance toward
the two hunters.

"I think," said Tarzan to Numa, "that you and I together can make
these beasts very unhappy." He spoke in English, which, of course,
Numa did not understand at all, but there must have been something
reassuring in the tone, for Numa whined pleadingly and moved
impatiently to and fro parallel with their antagonists.

"Come," said Tarzan suddenly and grasping the lion's mane with his
left hand he moved toward the other lions, his companion pacing
at his side. As the two advanced the others drew slowly back and,
finally separating, moved off to either side.  Tarzan and Numa
passed between them but neither the great black-maned lion nor the
man failed to keep an eye upon the beast nearer him so that they
were not caught unawares when, as though at some preconcerted
signal, the two cats charged simultaneously from opposite directions.

The ape-man met the charge of his antagonist after the same fashion
of fighting that he had been accustomed to employing in previous
encounters with Numa and Sheeta. To have attempted to meet the
full shock of a lion's charge would have been suicidal even for
the giant Tarmangani. Instead he resorted to methods of agility and
cunning, for quick as are the great cats, even quicker is Tarzan
of the Apes.

With outspread, raking talons and bared fangs Numa sprang for the
naked chest of the ape-man. Throwing up his left arm as a boxer might
ward off a blow, Tarzan struck upward beneath the left forearm of
the lion, at the same time rushing in with his shoulder beneath
the animal's body and simultaneously drove his blade into the tawny
hide behind the shoulder. With a roar of pain Numa wheeled again,
the personification of bestial rage. Now indeed would he exterminate
this presumptuous man-thing who dared even to think that he could
thwart the king of beasts in his desires. But as he wheeled, his
intended quarry wheeled with him, brown fingers locked in the heavy
mane on the powerful neck and again the blade struck deep into the
lion's side.

Then it was that Numa went mad with hate and pain and at the same
instant the ape-man leaped full upon his back.  Easily before had
Tarzan locked his legs beneath the belly of a lion while he clung
to its long mane and stabbed it until his point reached its heart.
So easy it had seemed before that he experienced a sharp feeling of
resentment that he was unable to do so now, for the quick movements
of the lion prevented him, and presently, to his dismay, as the
lion leaped and threw him about, the ape-man realized that he was
swinging inevitably beneath those frightful talons.

With a final effort he threw himself from Numa's back and sought,
by his quickness, to elude the frenzied beast for the fraction of
an instant that would permit him to regain his feet and meet the
animal again upon a more even footing. But this time Numa was too
quick for him and he was but partially up when a great paw struck
him on the side of the head and bowled him over.

As he fell he saw a black streak shoot above him and another lion
close upon his antagonist. Rolling from beneath the two battling lions
Tarzan regained his feet, though he was half dazed and staggering
from the impact of the terrible blow he had received. Behind him
he saw a lifeless lion lying torn and bleeding upon the sand, and
before him Numa of the pit was savagely mauling the second lion.

He of the black coat tremendously outclassed his adversary in
point of size and strength as well as in ferocity. The battling
beasts made a few feints and passes at each other before the larger
succeeded in fastening his fangs in the other's throat, and then,
as a cat shakes a mouse, the larger lion shook the lesser, and when
his dying foe sought to roll beneath and rake his conqueror with
his hind claws, the other met him halfway at his own game, and as
the great talons buried themselves in the lower part of the other's
chest and then were raked downward with all the terrific strength
of the mighty hind legs, the battle was ended.

As Numa rose from his second victim and shook himself, Tarzan could
not but again note the wondrous proportions and symmetry of the
beast. The lions they had bested were splendid specimens themselves
and in their coats Tarzan noted a suggestion of the black which
was such a strongly marked characteristic of Numa of the pit. Their
manes were just a trifle darker than an ordinary black-maned lion
but the tawny shade on the balance of their coats predominated.
However, the ape-man realized that they were a distinct species
from any he had seen as though they had sprung originally from a
cross between the forest lion of his acquaintance and a breed of
which Numa of the pit might be typical.

The immediate obstruction in his way having been removed, Tarzan was
for setting out in search of the spoor of the girl and Smith-Oldwick,
that he might discover their fate. He suddenly found himself
tremendously hungry and as he circled about over the sandy bottom
searching among the tangled network of innumerable tracks for those
of his proteges, there broke from his lips involuntarily the whine
of a hungry beast.  Immediately Numa of the pit pricked up his ears
and, regarding the ape-man steadily for a moment, he answered the
call of hunger and started briskly off toward the south, stopping
occasionally to see if Tarzan was following.

The ape-man realized that the beast was leading him to food, and so
he followed and as he followed his keen eyes and sensitive nostrils
sought for some indication of the direction taken by the man and
the girl. Presently out of the mass of lion tracks, Tarzan picked
up those of many sandaled feet and the scent spoor of the members
of the strange race such as had been with the lions the night
before, and then faintly he caught the scent spoor of the girl and
a little later that of Smith-Oldwick. Presently the tracks thinned
and here those of the girl and the Englishman became well marked.

They had been walking side by side and there had been men and
lions to the right and left of them, and men and lions in front and
behind. The ape-man was puzzled by the possibilities suggested by
the tracks, but in the light of any previous experience he could
not explain satisfactorily to himself what his perceptions indicated.

There was little change in the formation of the gorge; it still
wound its erratic course between precipitous cliffs. In places it
widened out and again it became very narrow and always deeper the
further south they traveled. Presently the bottom of the gorge began
to slope more rapidly. Here and there were indications of ancient
rapids and waterfalls. The trail became more difficult but was well
marked and showed indications of great antiquity, and, in places,
the handiwork of man. They had proceeded for a half or three-quarters
of a mile when, at a turning of the gorge, Tarzan saw before him a
narrow valley cut deep into the living rock of the earth's crust,
with lofty mountain ranges bounding it upon the south. How far it
extended east and west he could not see, but apparently it was no
more than three or four miles across from north to south.

That it was a well-watered valley was indicated by the wealth of
vegetation that carpeted its floor from the rocky cliffs upon the
north to the mountains on the south.

Over the edge of the cliffs from which the ape-man viewed the valley
a trail had been hewn that led downward to the base. Preceded by
the lion Tarzan descended into the valley, which, at this point,
was forested with large trees. Before him the trail wound onward
toward the center of the valley.  Raucous-voiced birds of brilliant
plumage screamed among the branches while innumerable monkeys
chattered and scolded above him.

The forest teemed with life, and yet there was borne in upon the
ape-man a sense of unutterable loneliness, a sensation that he
never before had felt in his beloved jungles. There was unreality
in everything about him--in the valley itself, lying hidden
and forgotten in what was supposed to be an arid waste. The birds
and the monkeys, while similar in type to many with which he was
familiar, were identical with none, nor was the vegetation without
its idiosyncrasies. It was as though he had been suddenly transported
to another world and he felt a strange restlessness that might
easily have been a premonition of danger.

Fruits were growing among the trees and some of these he saw that
Manu, the monkey, ate. Being hungry he swung to the lower branches
and, amidst a great chattering of the monkeys, proceeded to eat
such of the fruit as he saw the monkeys ate in safety. When he had
partially satisfied his hunger, for meat alone could fully do so,
he looked about him for Numa of the pit to discover that the lion
had gone.




Chapter XVII

The Walled City


Dropping to the ground once more he picked up the trail of the girl
and her captors, which he followed easily along what appeared to
be a well-beaten trail. It was not long before he came to a small
stream, where he quenched his thirst, and thereafter he saw that
the trail followed in the general direction of the stream, which
ran southwesterly. Here and there were cross trails and others
which joined the main avenue, and always upon each of them were the
tracks and scent of the great cats, of Numa, the lion, and Sheeta,
the panther.

With the exception of a few small rodents there appeared to be no
other wild life on the surface of the valley. There was no indication
of Bara, the deer, or Horta, the boar, or of Gorgo, the buffalo,
Buto, Tantor, or Duro. Histah, the snake, was there. He saw him in
the trees in greater numbers than he ever had seen Histah before;
and once beside a reedy pool he caught a scent that could have
belonged to none other than Gimla the crocodile, but upon none of
these did the Tarmangani care to feed.

And so, as he craved meat, he turned his attention to the birds
above him. His assailants of the night before had not disarmed
him. Either in the darkness and the rush of the charging lions the
human foe had overlooked him or else they had considered him dead;
but whatever the reason he still retained his weapons--his spear
and his long knife, his bow and arrows, and his grass rope.

Fitting a shaft to his bow Tarzan awaited an opportunity to bring
down one of the larger birds, and when the opportunity finally
presented itself he drove the arrow straight to its mark.  As the
gaily plumaged creature fluttered to earth its companions and the
little monkeys set up a most terrific chorus of wails and screaming
protests. The whole forest became suddenly a babel of hoarse screams
and shrill shrieks.

Tarzan would not have been surprised had one or two birds in the
immediate vicinity given voice to terror as they fled, but that the
whole life of the jungle should set up so weird a protest filled
him with disgust. It was an angry face that he turned up toward
the monkeys and the birds as there suddenly stirred within him a
savage inclination to voice his displeasure and his answer to what
he considered their challenge. And so it was that there broke upon
this jungle for the first time Tarzan's hideous scream of victory
and challenge.

The effect upon the creatures above him was instantaneous.  Where
before the air had trembled to the din of their voices, now utter
silence reigned and a moment later the ape-man was alone with his
puny kill.

The silence following so closely the previous tumult carried
a sinister impression to the ape-man, which still further aroused
his anger. Picking the bird from where it had fallen he withdrew
his arrow from the body and returned it to his quiver. Then with
his knife he quickly and deftly removed the skin and feathers
together. He ate angrily, growling as though actually menaced by
a near-by foe, and perhaps, too, his growls were partially induced
by the fact that he did not care for the flesh of birds. Better
this, however, than nothing and from what his senses had told him
there was no flesh in the vicinity such as he was accustomed to
and cared most for.  How he would have enjoyed a juicy haunch from
Pacco, the zebra, or a steak from the loin of Gorgo, the buffalo!
The very thought made his mouth water and increased his resentment
against this unnatural forest that harbored no such delicious
quarry.

He had but partially consumed his kill when he suddenly became
aware of a movement in the brush at no great distance from him
and downwind, and a moment later his nostrils picked up the scent
of Numa from the opposite direction, and then upon either side he
caught the fall of padded feet and the brushing of bodies against
leafy branches. The ape-man smiled. What stupid creature did they
think him, to be surprised by such clumsy stalkers? Gradually the
sounds and scents indicated that lions were moving upon him from
all directions, that he was in the center of a steadily converging
circle of beasts. Evidently they were so sure of their prey that
they were making no effort toward stealth, for he heard twigs crack
beneath their feet, and the brushing of their bodies against the
vegetation through which they forced their way.

He wondered what could have brought them. It seemed unreasonable
to believe that the cries of the birds and the monkeys should
have summoned them, and yet, if not, it was indeed a remarkable
coincidence. His judgment told him that the death of a single bird
in this forest which teemed with birds could scarce be of sufficient
moment to warrant that which followed. Yet even in the face of reason
and past experience he found that the whole affair perplexed him.

He stood in the center of the trail awaiting the coming of the lions
and wondering what would be the method of their attack or if they
would indeed attack. Presently a maned lion came into view along
the trail below him. At sight of him the lion halted. The beast was
similar to those that had attacked him earlier in the day, a trifle
larger and a trifle darker than the lions of his native jungles,
but neither so large nor so black as Numa of the pit.

Presently he distinguished the outlines of other lions in the
surrounding brush and among the trees. Each of them halted as it
came within sight of the ape-man and there they stood regarding
him in silence. Tarzan wondered how long it would be before they
charged and while he waited he resumed his feeding, though with
every sense constantly alert.

One by one the lions lay down, but always their faces were toward
him and their eyes upon him. There had been no growling and no
roaring--just the quiet drawing of the silent circle about him.
It was all so entirely foreign to anything that Tarzan ever before
had seen lions do that it irritated him so that presently, having
finished his repast, he fell to making insulting remarks to first
one and then another of the lions, after the habit he had learned
from the apes of his childhood.

"Dango, eater of carrion," he called them, and he compared them most
unfavorably with Histah, the snake, the most loathed and repulsive
creature of the jungle. Finally he threw handfuls of earth at them
and bits of broken twigs, and then the lions growled and bared
their fangs, but none of them advanced.

"Cowards," Tarzan taunted them. "Numa with a heart of Bara, the
deer." He told them who he was, and after the manner of the jungle
folk he boasted as to the horrible things he would do to them, but
the lions only lay and watched him.

It must have been a half hour after their coming that Tarzan caught
in the distance along the trail the sound of footsteps approaching.
They were the footsteps of a creature who walked upon two legs,
and though Tarzan could catch no scent spoor from that direction
he knew that a man was approaching. Nor had he long to wait before
his judgment was confirmed by the appearance of a man who halted
in the trail directly behind the first lion that Tarzan had seen.

At sight of the newcomer the ape-man realized that here was one
similar to those who had given off the unfamiliar scent spoor that
he had detected the previous night, and he saw that not only in
the matter of scent did the man differ from other human beings with
whom Tarzan was familiar.

The fellow was strongly built with skin of a leathery appearance,
like parchment yellowed with age. His hair, which was coal black
and three or four inches in length, grew out stiffly at right angles
to his scalp. His eyes were close set and the irises densely black
and very small, so that the white of the eyeball showed around
them. The man's face was smooth except for a few straggly hairs on
his chin and upper lip.  The nose was aquiline and fine, but the
hair grew so far down on the forehead as to suggest a very low
and brutal type.  The upper lip was short and fine while the lower
lip was rather heavy and inclined to be pendulous, the chin being
equally weak. Altogether the face carried the suggestion of a
once strong and handsome countenance entirely altered by physical
violence or by degraded habits and thoughts. The man's arms were
long, though not abnormally so, while his legs were short, though
straight.

He was clothed in tight-fitting nether garments and a loose,
sleeveless tunic that fell just below his hips, while his feet
were shod in soft-soled sandals, the wrappings of which extended
halfway to his knees, closely resembling a modern spiral military
legging. He carried a short, heavy spear, and at his side swung
a weapon that at first so astonished the ape-man that he could
scarcely believe the evidence of his senses--a heavy saber in
a leather-covered scabbard. The man's tunic appeared to have been
fabricated upon a loom--it was certainly not made of skins, while
the garments that covered his legs were quite as evidently made
from the hides of rodents.

Tarzan noted the utter unconcern with which the man approached the
lions, and the equal indifference of Numa to him. The fellow paused
for a moment as though appraising the ape-man and then pushed on
past the lions, brushing against the tawny hide as he passed him
in the trail.

About twenty feet from Tarzan the man stopped, addressing the former
in a strange jargon, no syllable of which was intelligible to the
Tarmangani. His gestures indicated numerous references to the lions
surrounding them, and once he touched his spear with the forefinger
of his left hand and twice he struck the saber at his hip.

While he spoke Tarzan studied the fellow closely, with the result
that there fastened itself upon his mind a strange conviction--that
the man who addressed him was what might only be described as a
rational maniac. As the thought came to the ape-man he could not
but smile, so paradoxical the description seemed. Yet a closer
study of the man's features, carriage, and the contour of his head
carried almost incontrovertibly the assurance that he was insane,
while the tones of his voice and his gestures resembled those of
a sane and intelligent mortal.

Presently the man had concluded his speech and appeared to be waiting
questioningly Tarzan's reply. The ape-man spoke to the other first
in the language of the great apes, but he soon saw that the words
carried no conviction to his listener. Then with equal futility
he tried several native dialects but to none of these did the man
respond.

By this time Tarzan began to lose patience. He had wasted sufficient
time by the road, and as he had never depended much upon speech in
the accomplishment of his ends, he now raised his spear and advanced
toward the other. This, evidently, was a language common to both,
for instantly the fellow raised his own weapon and at the same time
a low call broke from his lips, a call which instantly brought to
action every lion in the hitherto silent circle. A volley of roars
shattered the silence of the forest and simultaneously lions sprang
into view upon all sides as they closed in rapidly upon their
quarry. The man who had called them stepped back, his teeth bared
in a mirthless grin.

It was then that Tarzan first noticed that the fellow's upper canines
were unusually long and exceedingly sharp. It was just a flashing
glimpse he got of them as he leaped agilely from the ground and, to
the consternation of both the lions and their master, disappeared
in the foliage of the lower terrace, flinging back over his shoulder
as he swung rapidly away: "I am Tarzan of the Apes; mighty hunter;
mighty fighter! None in the jungle more powerful, none more cunning
than Tarzan!"

A short distance beyond the point at which they had surrounded him,
Tarzan came to the trail again and sought for the spoor of Bertha
Kircher and Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick.  He found them quickly and
continued upon his search for the two. The spoor lay directly along
the trail for another half-mile when the way suddenly debouched
from the forest into open land and there broke upon the astonished
view of the ape-man the domes and minarets of a walled city.

Directly before him in the wall nearest him Tarzan saw a low-arched
gateway to which a well-beaten trail led from that which he had
been following. In the open space between the forest and the city
walls, quantities of garden stuff was growing, while before him
at his feet, in an open man-made ditch, ran a stream of water! The
plants in the garden were laid out in well-spaced, symmetrical rows
and appeared to have been given excellent attention and cultivation.
Tiny streams were trickling between the rows from the main ditch
before him and at some distance to his right he could see people
at work among the plants.

The city wall appeared to be about thirty feet in height, its
plastered expanse unbroken except by occasional embrasures. Beyond
the wall rose the domes of several structures and numerous minarets
dotted the sky line of the city.  The largest and central dome
appeared to be gilded, while others were red, or blue, or yellow.
The architecture of the wall itself was of uncompromising simplicity.
It was of a cream shade and appeared to be plastered and painted.
At its base was a line of well-tended shrubs and at some distance
towards its eastern extremity it was vine covered to the top.

As he stood in the shadow of the trail, his keen eyes taking in every
detail of the picture before him, he became aware of the approach
of a party in his rear and there was borne to him the scent of the
man and the lions whom he had so readily escaped. Taking to the
trees Tarzan moved a short distance to the west and, finding a
comfortable crotch at the edge of the forest where he could watch
the trail leading through the gardens to the city gate, he awaited
the return of his would-be captors. And soon they came--the strange
man followed by the pack of great lions. Like dogs they moved along
behind him down the trail among the gardens to the gate.

Here the man struck upon the panels of the door with the butt of
his spear, and when it opened in response to his signal he passed
in with his lions. Beyond the open door Tarzan, from his distant
perch, caught but a fleeting glimpse of life within the city, just
enough to indicate that there were other human creatures who abode
there, and then the door closed.

Through that door he knew that the girl and the man whom he sought
to succor had been taken into the city. What fate lay in store
for them or whether already it had been meted out to them he could
not even guess, nor where, within that forbidding wall, they were
incarcerated he could not know.  But of one thing he was assured:
that if he were to aid them he could not do it from outside the
wall. He must gain entrance to the city first, nor did he doubt,
that once within, his keen senses would eventually reveal the
whereabouts of those whom he sought.

The low sun was casting long shadows across the gardens when Tarzan
saw the workers returning from the eastern field.  A man came first,
and as he came he lowered little gates along the large ditch of
running water, shutting off the streams that had run between the rows
of growing plants; and behind him came other men carrying burdens
of fresh vegetables in great woven baskets upon their shoulders.
Tarzan had not realized that there had been so many men working in
the field, but now as he sat there at the close of the day he saw
a procession filing in from the east, bearing the tools and the
produce back into the city.

And then, to gain a better view, the ape-man ascended to the topmost
branches of a tall tree where he overlooked the nearer wall. From
this point of vantage he saw that the city was long and narrow, and
that while the outer walls formed a perfect rectangle, the streets
within were winding. Toward the center of the city there appeared
to be a low, white building around which the larger edifices of
the city had been built, and here, in the fast-waning light, Tarzan
thought that between two buildings he caught the glint of water,
but of that he was not sure. His experience of the centers of
civilization naturally inclined him to believe that this central
area was a plaza about which the larger buildings were grouped
and that there would be the most logical place to search first for
Bertha Kircher and her companion.

And then the sun went down and darkness quickly enveloped the
city--a darkness that was accentuated for the ape-man rather than
relieved by the artificial lights which immediately appeared in
many of the windows visible to him.

Tarzan had noticed that the roofs of most of the buildings were
flat, the few exceptions being those of what he imagined to be the
more pretentious public structures. How this city had come to exist
in this forgotten part of unexplored Africa the ape-man could not
conceive. Better than another, he realized something of the unsolved
secrets of the Great Dark Continent, enormous areas of which have
as yet been untouched by the foot of civilized man. Yet he could
scarce believe that a city of this size and apparently thus well
constructed could have existed for the generations that it must
have been there, without intercourse with the outer world.  Even
though it was surrounded by a trackless desert waste, as he knew
it to be, he could not conceive that generation after generation
of men could be born and die there without attempting to solve the
mysteries of the world beyond the confines of their little valley.

And yet, here was the city surrounded by tilled land and filled
with people!

With the coming of night there arose throughout the jungle the cries
of the great cats, the voice of Numa blended with that of Sheeta,
and the thunderous roars of the great males reverberated through
the forest until the earth trembled, and from within the city came
the answering roars of other lions.

A simple plan for gaining entrance to the city had occurred to
Tarzan, and now that darkness had fallen he set about to put it
into effect. Its success hinged entirely upon the strength of the
vines he had seen surmounting the wall toward the east. In this
direction he made his way, while from out of the forest about him
the cries of the flesh-eaters increased in volume and ferocity. A
quarter of a mile intervened between the forest and the city wall--a
quarter of a mile of cultivated land unrelieved by a single tree.
Tarzan of the Apes realized his limitations and so he knew that
it would undoubtedly spell death for him to be caught in the open
space by one of the great black lions of the forest if, as he had
already surmised, Numa of the pit was a specimen of the forest lion
of the valley.

He must, therefore, depend entirely upon his cunning and his speed,
and upon the chance that the vine would sustain his weight.

He moved through the middle terrace, where the way is always
easiest, until he reached a point opposite the vine-clad portion
of the wall, and there he waited, listening and scenting, until he
might assure himself that there was no Numa within his immediate
vicinity, or, at least, none that sought him. And when he was quite
sure that there was no lion close by in the forest, and none in
the clearing between himself and the wall, he dropped lightly to
the ground and moved stealthily out into the open.

The rising moon, just topping the eastern cliffs, cast its bright
rays upon the long stretch of open garden beneath the wall. And, too,
it picked out in clear relief for any curious eyes that chanced to
be cast in that direction, the figure of the giant ape-man moving
across the clearing. It was only chance, of course, that a great
lion hunting at the edge of the forest saw the figure of the man
halfway between the forest and the wall. Suddenly there broke upon
Tarzan's ears a menacing sound. It was not the roar of a hungry
lion, but the roar of a lion in rage, and, as he glanced back in
the direction from which the sound came, he saw a huge beast moving
out from the shadow of the forest toward him.

Even in the moonlight and at a distance Tarzan saw that the lion
was huge; that it was indeed another of the black-maned monsters
similar to Numa of the pit. For an instant he was impelled to turn
and fight, but at the same time the thought of the helpless girl
imprisoned in the city flashed through his brain and, without an
instant's hesitation, Tarzan of the Apes wheeled and ran for the
wall. Then it was that Numa charged.

Numa, the lion, can run swiftly for a short distance, but he lacks
endurance. For the period of an ordinary charge he can cover the
ground with greater rapidity possibly than any other creature in
the world. Tarzan, on the other hand, could run at great speed for
long distances, though never as rapidly as Numa when the latter
charged.

The question of his fate, then, rested upon whether, with his start
he could elude Numa for a few seconds; and, if so, if the lion would
then have sufficient stamina remaining to pursue him at a reduced
gait for the balance of the distance to the wall.

Never before, perhaps, was staged a more thrilling race, and yet it
was run with only the moon and stars to see. Alone and in silence
the two beasts sped across the moonlit clearing.  Numa gained with
appalling rapidity upon the fleeing man, yet at every bound Tarzan
was nearer to the vine-clad wall.  Once the ape-man glanced back.
Numa was so close upon him that it seemed inevitable that at the
next bound he should drag him down; so close was he that the ape-man
drew his knife as he ran, that he might at least give a good account
of himself in the last moments of his life.

But Numa had reached the limit of his speed and endurance.  Gradually
he dropped behind but he did not give up the pursuit, and now Tarzan
realized how much hinged upon the strength of the untested vines.

If, at the inception of the race, only Goro and the stars had looked
down upon the contestants, such was not the case at its finish,
since from an embrasure near the summit of the wall two close-set
black eyes peered down upon the two.  Tarzan was a dozen yards
ahead of Numa when he reached the wall. There was no time to stop
and institute a search for sturdy stems and safe handholds. His
fate was in the hands of chance and with the realization he gave a
final spurt and running catlike up the side of the wall among the
vines, sought with his hands for something that would sustain his
weight. Below him Numa leaped also.




Chapter XVIII

Among the Maniacs


As the lions swarmed over her protectors, Bertha Kircher shrank
back in the cave in a momentary paralysis of fright super-induced,
perhaps, by the long days of terrific nerve strain which she had
undergone.

Mingled with the roars of the lions had been the voices of men,
and presently out of the confusion and turmoil she felt the near
presence of a human being, and then hands reached forth and seized
her. It was dark and she could see but little, nor any sign of the
English officer or the ape-man. The man who seized her kept the
lions from her with what appeared to be a stout spear, the haft of
which he used to beat off the beasts. The fellow dragged her from
the cavern the while he shouted what appeared to be commands and
warnings to the lions.

Once out upon the light sands of the bottom of the gorge objects
became more distinguishable, and then she saw that there were
other men in the party and that two half led and half carried the
stumbling figure of a third, whom she guessed must be Smith-Oldwick.

For a time the lions made frenzied efforts to reach the two captives
but always the men with them succeeded in beating them off. The
fellows seemed utterly unafraid of the great beasts leaping and
snarling about them, handling them much the same as one might handle
a pack of obstreperous dogs.  Along the bed of the old watercourse
that once ran through the gorge they made their way, and as the
first faint lightening of the eastern horizon presaged the coming
dawn, they paused for a moment upon the edge of a declivity, which
appeared to the girl in the strange light of the waning night as a
vast, bottomless pit; but, as their captors resumed their way and
the light of the new day became stronger, she saw that they were
moving downward toward a dense forest.

Once beneath the over-arching trees all was again Cimmerian darkness,
nor was the gloom relieved until the sun finally arose beyond the
eastern cliffs, when she saw that they were following what appeared
to be a broad and well-beaten game trail through a forest of great
trees. The ground was unusually dry for an African forest and
the underbrush, while heavily foliaged, was not nearly so rank
and impenetrable as that which she had been accustomed to find
in similar woods.  It was as though the trees and the bushes grew
in a waterless country, nor was there the musty odor of decaying
vegetation or the myriads of tiny insects such as are bred in damp
places.

As they proceeded and the sun rose higher, the voices of the
arboreal jungle life rose in discordant notes and loud chattering
about them. Innumerable monkeys scolded and screamed in the branches
overhead, while harsh-voiced birds of brilliant plumage darted
hither and thither. She noticed presently that their captors often
cast apprehensive glances in the direction of the birds and on
numerous occasions seemed to be addressing the winged denizens of
the forest.

One incident made a marked impression on her. The man who immediately
preceded her was a fellow of powerful build, yet, when a brilliantly
colored parrot swooped downward toward him, he dropped upon his knees
and covering his face with his arms bent forward until his head
touched the ground. Some of the others looked at him and laughed
nervously. Presently the man glanced upward and seeing that the
bird had gone, rose to his feet and continued along the trail.

It was at this brief halt that Smith-Oldwick was brought to her
side by the men who had been supporting him. He had been rather
badly mauled by one of the lions; but was now able to walk alone,
though he was extremely weak from shock and loss of blood.

"Pretty mess, what?" he remarked with a wry smile, indicating his
bloody and disheveled state.

"It is terrible," said the girl. "I hope you are not suffering."

"Not as much as I should have expected," he replied, "but I feel
as weak as a fool. What sort of creatures are these beggars, anyway?"

"I don't know," she replied, "there is something terribly uncanny
about their appearance."

The man regarded one of their captors closely for a moment and
then, turning to the girl asked, "Did you ever visit a madhouse?"

She looked up at him in quick understanding and with a horrified
expression in her eyes. "That's it!" she cried.

"They have all the earmarks," he said. "Whites of the eyes showing
all around the irises, hair growing stiffly erect from the scalp
and low down upon the forehead--even their mannerisms and their
carriage are those of maniacs."

The girl shuddered.

"Another thing about them," continued the Englishman, "that doesn't
appear normal is that they are afraid of parrots and utterly fearless
of lions."

"Yes," said the girl; "and did you notice that the birds seem utterly
fearless of them--really seem to hold them in contempt? Have you
any idea what language they speak?"

"No," said the man, "I have been trying to figure that out.  It's not
like any of the few native dialects of which I have any knowledge."

"It doesn't sound at all like the native language," said the girl,
"but there is something familiar about it. You know, every now and
then I feel that I am just on the verge of understanding what they
are saying, or at least that somewhere I have heard their tongue
before, but final recognition always eludes me."

"I doubt if you ever heard their language spoken," said the man.
"These people must have lived in this out-of-the-way valley for
ages and even if they had retained the original language of their
ancestors without change, which is doubtful, it must be some tongue
that is no longer spoken in the outer world."

At one point where a stream of water crossed the trail the party
halted while the lions and the men drank. They motioned to their
captives to drink too, and as Bertha Kircher and Smith-Oldwick,
lying prone upon the ground drank from the clear, cool water of the
rivulet, they were suddenly startled by the thunderous roar of a
lion a short distance ahead of them. Instantly the lions with them
set up a hideous response, moving restlessly to and fro with their
eyes always either turned in the direction from which the roar had
come or toward their masters, against whom the tawny beasts slunk.
The men loosened the sabers in their scabbards, the weapons that
had aroused Smith-Oldwick's curiosity as they had Tarzan's, and
grasped their spears more firmly.

Evidently there were lions and lions, and while they evinced no
fear of the beasts which accompanied them, it was quite evident
that the voice of the newcomer had an entirely different effect
upon them, although the men seemed less terrified than the lions.
Neither, however, showed any indication of an inclination to flee;
on the contrary the entire party advanced along the trail in the
direction of the menacing roars, and presently there appeared in
the center of the path a black lion of gigantic proportions. To
Smith-Oldwick and the girl he appeared to be the same lion that
they had encountered at the plane and from which Tarzan had rescued
them. But it was not Numa of the pit, although he resembled him
closely.

The black beast stood directly in the center of the trail lashing
his tail and growling menacingly at the advancing party. The men
urged on their own beasts, who growled and whined but hesitated
to charge. Evidently becoming impatient, and in full consciousness
of his might the intruder raised his tail stiffly erect and shot
forward. Several of the defending lions made a half-hearted attempt to
obstruct his passage, but they might as well have placed themselves
in the path of an express train, as hurling them aside the great
beast leaped straight for one of the men. A dozen spears were
launched at him and a dozen sabers leaped from their scabbards;
gleaming, razor-edged weapons they were, but for the instant rendered
futile by the terrific speed of the charging beast.

Two of the spears entering his body but served to further enrage
him as, with demoniacal roars, he sprang upon the hapless man he
had singled out for his prey. Scarcely pausing in his charge he
seized the fellow by the shoulder and, turning quickly at right
angles, leaped into the concealing foliage that flanked the trail,
and was gone, bearing his victim with him.

So quickly had the whole occurrence transpired that the formation
of the little party was scarcely altered. There had been no
opportunity for flight, even if it had been contemplated; and now
that the lion was gone with his prey the men made no move to pursue
him. They paused only long enough to recall the two or three of
their lions that had scattered and then resumed the march along
the trail.

"Might be an everyday occurrence from all the effect it has on
them," remarked Smith-Oldwick to the girl.

"Yes," she said. "They seem to be neither surprised nor disconcerted,
and evidently they are quite sure that the lion, having got what
he came for, will not molest them further."

"I had thought," said the Englishman, "that the lions of the Wamabo
country were about the most ferocious in existence, but they are
regular tabby cats by comparison with these big black fellows.
Did you ever see anything more utterly fearless or more terribly
irresistible than that charge?"

For a while, as they walked side by side, their thoughts and
conversation centered upon this latest experience, until the trail
emerging from the forest opened to their view a walled city and an
area of cultivated land. Neither could suppress an exclamation of
surprise.

"Why, that wall is a regular engineering job," exclaimed Smith-Oldwick.

"And look at the domes and minarets of the city beyond," cried the
girl. "There must be a civilized people beyond that wall. Possibly
we are fortunate to have fallen into their hands."

Smith-Oldwick shrugged his shoulders. "I hope so," he said, "though
I am not at all sure about people who travel about with lions and
are afraid of parrots. There must be something wrong with them."

The party followed the trail across the field to an arched gateway
which opened at the summons of one of their captors, who beat upon
the heavy wooden panels with his spear.  Beyond, the gate opened
into a narrow street which seemed but a continuation of the jungle
trail leading from the forest.  Buildings on either hand adjoined
the wall and fronted the narrow, winding street, which was only
visible for a short distance ahead. The houses were practically
all two-storied structures, the upper stories flush with the street
while the walls of the first story were set back some ten feet,
a series of simple columns and arches supporting the front of the
second story and forming an arcade on either side of the narrow
thoroughfare.

The pathway in the center of the street was unpaved, but the floors
of the arcades were cut stone of various shapes and sizes but all
carefully fitted and laid without mortar. These floors gave evidence
of great antiquity, there being a distinct depression down the
center as though the stone had been worn away by the passage of
countless sandaled feet during the ages that it had lain there.

There were few people astir at this early hour, and these were of
the same type as their captors. At first those whom they saw were
only men, but as they went deeper into the city they came upon a
few naked children playing in the soft dust of the roadway. Many
they passed showed the greatest surprise and curiosity in the
prisoners, and often made inquiries of the guards, which the two
assumed must have been in relation to themselves, while others
appeared not to notice them at all.

"I wish we could understand their bally language," exclaimed
Smith-Oldwick.

"Yes," said the girl, "I would like to ask them what they are going
to do with us."

"That would be interesting," said the man. "I have been doing
considerable wondering along that line myself."

"I don't like the way their canine teeth are filed," said the girl.
"It's too suggestive of some of the cannibals I have seen."

"You don't really believe they are cannibals, do you?" asked the
man. "You don't think white people are ever cannibals, do you?"

"Are these people white?" asked the girl.

"They're not Negroes, that's certain," rejoined the man.  "Their
skin is yellow, but yet it doesn't resemble the Chinese exactly,
nor are any of their features Chinese."

It was at this juncture that they caught their first glimpse of a
native woman. She was similar in most respects to the men though
her stature was smaller and her figure more symmetrical. Her face
was more repulsive than that of the men, possibly because of the fact
that she was a woman, which rather accentuated the idiosyncrasies
of eyes, pendulous lip, pointed tusks and stiff, low-growing hair.
The latter was longer than that of the men and much heavier. It
hung about her shoulders and was confined by a colored bit of some
lacy fabric.  Her single garment appeared to be nothing more than
a filmy scarf which was wound tightly around her body from below
her naked breasts, being caught up some way at the bottom near her
ankles. Bits of shiny metal resembling gold, ornamented both the
headdress and the skirt. Otherwise the woman was entirely without
jewelry. Her bare arms were slender and shapely and her hands and
feet well proportioned and symmetrical.

She came close to the party as they passed her, jabbering to the
guards who paid no attention to her. The prisoners had an opportunity
to observe her closely as she followed at their side for a short
distance.

"The figure of a houri," remarked Smith-Oldwick, "with the face of
an imbecile."

The street they followed was intersected at irregular intervals by
crossroads which, as they glanced down them, proved to be equally
as tortuous as that through which they were being conducted. The
houses varied but little in design.  Occasionally there were bits
of color, or some attempt at other architectural ornamentation.
Through open windows and doors they could see that the walls of
the houses were very thick and that all apertures were quite small,
as though the people had built against extreme heat, which they
realized must have been necessary in this valley buried deep in an
African desert.

Ahead they occasionally caught glimpses of larger structures, and
as they approached them, came upon what was evidently a part of
the business section of the city. There were numerous small shops
and bazaars interspersed among the residences, and over the doors
of these were signs painted in characters strongly suggesting Greek
origin and yet it was not Greek as both the Englishman and the girl
knew.

Smith-Oldwick was by this time beginning to feel more acutely the
pain of his wounds and the consequent weakness that was greatly
aggravated by loss of blood. He staggered now occasionally and the
girl, seeing his plight, offered him her arm.

"No," he expostulated, "you have passed through too much yourself
to have any extra burden imposed upon you." But though he made a
valiant effort to keep up with their captors he occasionally lagged,
and upon one such occasion the guards for the first time showed
any disposition toward brutality.

It was a big fellow who walked at Smith-Oldwick's left.  Several
times he took hold of the Englishman's arm and pushed him forward
not ungently, but when the captive lagged again and again the
fellow suddenly, and certainly with no just provocation, flew into
a perfect frenzy of rage.  He leaped upon the wounded man, striking
him viciously with his fists and, bearing him to the ground, grasped
his throat in his left hand while with his right he drew his long
sharp saber. Screaming terribly he waved the blade above his head.

The others stopped and turned to look upon the encounter with no
particular show of interest. It was as though one of the party had
paused to readjust a sandal and the others merely waited until he
was ready to march on again.

But if their captors were indifferent, Bertha Kircher was not.  The
close-set blazing eyes, the snarling fanged face, and the frightful
screams filled her with horror, while the brutal and wanton attack
upon the wounded man aroused within her the spirit of protection
for the weak that is inherent in all women.  Forgetful of everything
other than that a weak and defenseless man was being brutally murdered
before her eyes, the girl cast aside discretion and, rushing to
Smith-Oldwick's assistance, seized the uplifted sword arm of the
shrieking creature upon the prostrate Englishman.

Clinging desperately to the fellow she surged backward with all her
weight and strength with the result that she overbalanced him and
sent him sprawling to the pavement upon his back. In his efforts
to save himself he relaxed his grasp upon the grip of his saber
which had no sooner fallen to the ground than it was seized upon by
the girl. Standing erect beside the prostrate form of the English
officer Bertha Kircher, the razor-edged weapon grasped firmly in
her hand, faced their captors.

She was a brave figure; even her soiled and torn riding togs and
disheveled hair detracted nothing from her appearance.  The creature
she had felled scrambled quickly to his feet and in the instant
his whole demeanor changed. From demoniacal rage he became suddenly
convulsed with hysterical laughter although it was a question in
the girl's mind as to which was the more terrifying. His companions
stood looking on with vacuous grins upon their countenances, while
he from whom the girl had wrested the weapon leaped up and down
shrieking with laughter. If Bertha Kircher had needed further
evidence to assure her that they were in the hands of a mentally
deranged people the man's present actions would have been sufficient
to convince her. The sudden uncontrolled rage and now the equally
uncontrolled and mirthless laughter but emphasized the facial
attributes of idiocy.

Suddenly realizing how helpless she was in the event any one of the
men should seek to overpower her, and moved by a sudden revulsion
of feeling that brought on almost a nausea of disgust, the girl
hurled the weapon upon the ground at the feet of the laughing maniac
and, turning, kneeled beside the Englishman.

"It was wonderful of you," he said, "but you shouldn't have done
it. Don't antagonize them: I believe that they are all mad and you
know they say that one should always humor a madman."

She shook her head. "I couldn't see him kill you," she said.

A sudden light sprang to the man's eyes as he reached out a hand and
grasped the girl's fingers. "Do you care a little now?" he asked.
"Can't you tell me that you do--just a bit?"

She did not withdraw her hand from his but she shook her head
sadly. "Please don't," she said. "I am sorry that I can only like
you very much."

The light died from his eyes and his fingers relaxed their grasp on
hers. "Please forgive me," he murmured. "I intended waiting until
we got out of this mess and you were safe among your own people.
It must have been the shock or something like that, and seeing you
defending me as you did. Anyway, I couldn't help it and really it
doesn't make much difference what I say now, does it?"

"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

He shrugged and smiled ruefully. "I will never leave this city
alive," he said. "I wouldn't mention it except that I realize that
you must know it as well as I. I was pretty badly torn up by the
lion and this fellow here has about finished me.  There might be
some hope if we were among civilized people, but here with these
frightful creatures what care could we get even if they were
friendly?"

Bertha Kircher knew that he spoke the truth, and yet she could not
bring herself to an admission that Smith-Oldwick would die. She
was very fond of him, in fact her great regret was that she did
not love him, but she knew that she did not.

It seemed to her that it could be such an easy thing for any girl
to love Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick--an English officer
and a gentleman, the scion of an old family and himself a man of
ample means, young, good-looking and affable. What more could a
girl ask for than to have such a man love her and that she possessed
Smith-Oldwick's love there was no doubt in Bertha Kircher's mind.

She sighed, and then, laying her hand impulsively on his forehead,
she whispered, "Do not give up hope, though. Try to live for my
sake and for your sake I will try to love you."

It was as though new life had suddenly been injected into the
man's veins. His face lightened instantly and with strength that
he himself did not know he possessed he rose slowly to his feet,
albeit somewhat unsteadily. The girl helped him and supported him
after he had arisen.

For the moment they had been entirely unconscious of their
surroundings and now as she looked at their captors she saw that
they had fallen again into their almost habitual manner of stolid
indifference, and at a gesture from one of them the march was
resumed as though no untoward incident had occurred.

Bertha Kircher experienced a sudden reaction from the momentary
exaltation of her recent promise to the Englishman.  She knew that
she had spoken more for him than for herself but now that it was
over she realized, as she had realized the moment before she had
spoken, that it was unlikely she would ever care for him the way
he wished. But what had she promised? Only that she would try to
love him. "And now?" she asked herself.

She realized that there might be little hope of their ever returning
to civilization. Even if these people should prove friendly and
willing to let them depart in peace, how were they to find their
way back to the coast? With Tarzan dead, as she fully believed him
after having seen his body lying lifeless at the mouth of the cave
when she had been dragged forth by her captor, there seemed no
power at their command which could guide them safely.

The two had scarcely mentioned the ape-man since their capture, for
each realized fully what his loss meant to them.  They had compared
notes relative to those few exciting moments of the final attack
and capture and had found that they agreed perfectly upon all that
had occurred. Smith-Oldwick had even seen the lion leap upon Tarzan
at the instant that the former was awakened by the roars of the
charging beasts, and though the night had been dark, he had been
able to see that the body of the savage ape-man had never moved
from the instant that it had come down beneath the beast.

And so, if at other times within the past few weeks Bertha Kircher
had felt that her situation was particularly hopeless, she was now
ready to admit that hope was absolutely extinct.

The streets were beginning to fill with the strange men and women
of this strange city. Sometimes individuals would notice them
and seem to take a great interest in them, and again others would
pass with vacant stares, seemingly unconscious of their immediate
surroundings and paying no attention whatsoever to the prisoners.
Once they heard hideous screams up a side street, and looking they
saw a man in the throes of a demoniacal outburst of rage, similar
to that which they had witnessed in the recent attack upon
Smith-Oldwick. This creature was venting his insane rage upon a
child which he repeatedly struck and bit, pausing only long enough
to shriek at frequent intervals. Finally, just before they passed
out of sight the creature raised the limp body of the child high
above his head and cast it down with all his strength upon the
pavement, and then, wheeling and screaming madly at the top of his
lungs, he dashed headlong up the winding street.

Two women and several men had stood looking on at the cruel attack.
They were at too great a distance for the Europeans to know whether
their facial expressions portrayed pity or rage, but be that as it
may, none offered to interfere.

A few yards farther on a hideous hag leaned from a second story
window where she laughed and jibbered and made horrid grimaces at
all who passed her. Others went their ways apparently attending to
whatever duties called them, as soberly as the inhabitants of any
civilized community.

"God," muttered Smith-Oldwick, "what an awful place!"

The girl turned suddenly toward him. "You still have your pistol?"
she asked him.

"Yes," he replied. "I tucked it inside my shirt. They did not
search me and it was too dark for them to see whether I carried any
weapons or not. So I hid it in the hope that I might get through
with it."

She moved closer to him and took hold of his hand. "Save one
cartridge for me, please?" she begged.

Smith-Oldwick looked down at her and blinked his eyes very rapidly.
An unfamiliar and disconcerting moisture had come into them. He
had realized, of course, how bad a plight was theirs but somehow
it had seemed to affect him only: it did not seem possible that
anyone could harm this sweet and beautiful girl.

And that she should have to be destroyed--destroyed by him! It
was too hideous: it was unbelievable, unthinkable! If he had been
filled with apprehension before, he was doubly perturbed now.

"I don't believe I could do it, Bertha," he said.

"Not even to save me from something worse?" she asked.

He shook his head dismally. "I could never do it," he replied.

The street that they were following suddenly opened upon a wide
avenue, and before them spread a broad and beautiful lagoon, the
quiet surface of which mirrored the clear cerulean of the sky. Here
the aspect of all their surroundings changed.  The buildings were
higher and much more pretentious in design and ornamentation.
The street itself was paved in mosaics of barbaric but stunningly
beautiful design. In the ornamentation of the buildings there was
considerable color and a great deal of what appeared to be gold
leaf. In all the decorations there was utilized in various ways the
conventional figure of the parrot, and, to a lesser extent, that
of the lion and the monkey.

Their captors led them along the pavement beside the lagoon for a
short distance and then through an arched doorway into one of the
buildings facing the avenue. Here, directly within the entrance
was a large room furnished with massive benches and tables, many of
which were elaborately hand carved with the figures of the inevitable
parrot, the lion, or the monkey, the parrot always predominating.

Behind one of the tables sat a man who differed in no way that the
captives could discover from those who accompanied them. Before
this person the party halted, and one of the men who had brought
them made what seemed to be an oral report.  Whether they were
before a judge, a military officer, or a civil dignitary they could
not know, but evidently he was a man of authority, for, after
listening to whatever recital was being made to him the while
he closely scrutinized the two captives, he made a single futile
attempt to converse with them and then issued some curt orders to
him who had made the report.

Almost immediately two of the men approached Bertha Kircher and
signaled her to accompany them. Smith-Oldwick started to follow her
but was intercepted by one of their guards. The girl stopped then
and turned back, at the same time looking at the man at the table
and making signs with her hands, indicating, as best she could,
that she wished Smith-Oldwick to remain with her, but the fellow
only shook his head negatively and motioned to the guards to remove
her.  The Englishman again attempted to follow but was restrained.
He was too weak and helpless even to make an attempt to enforce
his wishes. He thought of the pistol inside his shirt and then of
the futility of attempting to overcome an entire city with the few
rounds of ammunition left to him.

So far, with the single exception of the attack made upon him, they
had no reason to believe that they might not receive fair treatment
from their captors, and so he reasoned that it might be wiser to
avoid antagonizing them until such a time as he became thoroughly
convinced that their intentions were entirely hostile. He saw the
girl led from the building and just before she disappeared from
his view she turned and waved her hand to him:

"Good luck!" she cried, and was gone.

The lions that had entered the building with the party had, during
their examination by the man at the table, been driven from the
apartment through a doorway behind him. Toward this same doorway
two of the men now led Smith-Oldwick.  He found himself in a long
corridor from the sides of which other doorways opened, presumably
into other apartments of the building. At the far end of the corridor
he saw a heavy grating beyond which appeared an open courtyard.
Into this courtyard the prisoner was conducted, and as he entered
it with the two guards he found himself in an opening which was
bounded by the inner walls of the building. It was in the nature
of a garden in which a number of trees and flowering shrubs grew.
Beneath several of the trees were benches and there was a bench
along the south wall, but what aroused his most immediate attention
was the fact that the lions who had assisted in their capture and
who had accompanied them upon the return to the city, lay sprawled
about upon the ground or wandered restlessly to and fro.

Just inside the gate his guard halted. The two men exchanged a few
words and then turned and reentered the corridor. The Englishman
was horror-stricken as the full realization of his terrible plight
forced itself upon his tired brain. He turned and seized the grating
in an attempt to open it and gain the safety of the corridor, but
he found it securely locked against his every effort, and then he
called aloud to the retreating figure of the men within. The only
reply he received was a high-pitched, mirthless laugh, and then
the two passed through the doorway at the far end of the corridor
and he was alone with the lions.




Chapter XIX

The Queen's Story


In the meantime Bertha Kircher was conducted the length of the
plaza toward the largest and most pretentious of the buildings
surrounding it. This edifice covered the entire width of one end
of the plaza. It was several stories in height, the main entrance
being approached by a wide flight of stone steps, the bottom of
which was guarded by enormous stone lions, while at the top there
were two pedestals flanking the entrance and of the same height,
upon each of which was the stone image of a large parrot. As the
girl neared these latter images she saw that the capital of each
column was hewn into the semblance of a human skull upon which
the parrots perched. Above the arched doorway and upon the walls
of the building were the figures of other parrots, of lions, and
of monkeys. Some of these were carved in bas-relief; others were
delineated in mosaics, while still others appeared to have been
painted upon the surface of the wall.

The colorings of the last were apparently much subdued by age
with the result that the general effect was soft and beautiful.
The sculpturing and mosaic work were both finely executed, giving
evidence of a high degree of artistic skill. Unlike the first
building into which she had been conducted, the entrance to which
had been doorless, massive doors closed the entrance which she now
approached. In the niches formed by the columns which supported
the door's arch, and about the base of the pedestals of the stone
parrots, as well as in various other places on the broad stairway,
lolled some score of armed men. The tunics of these were all of a
vivid yellow and upon the breast and back of each was embroidered
the figure of a parrot.

As she was conducted up the stairway one of these yellow-coated
warriors approached and halted her guides at the top of the steps.
Here they exchanged a few words and while they were talking the
girl noticed that he who had halted them, as well as those whom
she could see of his companions, appeared to be, if possible, of
a lower mentality than her original captors.

Their coarse, bristling hair grew so low upon their foreheads as,
in some instances, to almost join their eyebrows, while the irises
were smaller, exposing more of the white of the eyeball.

After a short parley the man in charge of the doorway, for such
he seemed to be, turned and struck upon one of the panels with
the butt of his spear, at the same time calling to several of his
companions, who rose and came forward at his command. Soon the great
doors commenced slowly to swing creakingly open, and presently,
as they separated, the girl saw behind them the motive force which
operated the massive doors--to each door a half-dozen naked Negroes.

At the doorway her two guards were turned back and their places taken
by a half dozen of the yellow-coated soldiery.  These conducted her
through the doorway which the blacks, pulling upon heavy chains,
closed behind them. And as the girl watched them she noted with
horror that the poor creatures were chained by the neck to the
doors.

Before her led a broad hallway in the center of which was a little
pool of clear water. Here again in floor and walls was repeated in
new and ever-changing combinations and designs, the parrots, the
monkeys, and the lions, but now many of the figures were of what
the girl was convinced must be gold.  The walls of the corridor
consisted of a series of open archways through which, upon either
side, other spacious apartments were visible. The hallway was
entirely unfurnished, but the rooms on either side contained benches
and tables.  Glimpses of some of the walls revealed the fact that
they were covered with hangings of some colored fabric, while upon
the floors were thick rugs of barbaric design and the skins of
black lions and beautifully marked leopards.

The room directly to the right of the entrance was filled with men
wearing the yellow tunics of her new guard while the walls were hung
with numerous spears and sabers. At the far end of the corridor a
low flight of steps led to another closed doorway. Here the guard
was again halted. One of the guards at this doorway, after receiving
the report of one of those who accompanied her, passed through the
door, leaving them standing outside. It was fully fifteen minutes
before he returned, when the guard was again changed and the girl
conducted into the chamber beyond.

Through three other chambers and past three more massive doors, at
each of which her guard was changed, the girl was conducted before
she was ushered into a comparatively small room, back and forth
across the floor of which paced a man in a scarlet tunic, upon the
front and back of which was embroidered an enormous parrot and upon
whose head was a barbaric headdress surmounted by a stuffed parrot.

The walls of this room were entirely hidden by hangings upon which
hundreds, even thousands, of parrots were embroidered. Inlaid in
the floor were golden parrots, while, as thickly as they could be
painted, upon the ceiling were brilliant-hued parrots with wings
outspread as though in the act of flying.

The man himself was larger of stature than any she had yet seen
within the city. His parchment-like skin was wrinkled with age and
he was much fatter than any other of his kind that she had seen.
His bared arms, however, gave evidence of great strength and his
gait was not that of an old man. His facial expression denoted almost
utter imbecility and he was quite the most repulsive creature that
ever Bertha Kircher had looked upon.

For several minutes after she was conducted into his presence
he appeared not to be aware that she was there but continued his
restless pacing to and fro. Suddenly, without the slightest warning,
and while he was at the far end of the room from her with his back
toward her, he wheeled and rushed madly at her. Involuntarily the
girl shrank back, extending her open palms toward the frightful
creature as though to hold him aloof but a man upon either side of
her, the two who had conducted her into the apartment, seized and
held her.

Although he rushed violently toward her the man stopped without
touching her. For a moment his horrid white-rimmed eyes glared
searchingly into her face, immediately following which he burst
into maniacal laughter. For two or three minutes the creature gave
himself over to merriment and then, stopping as suddenly as he
had commenced to laugh, he fell to examining the prisoner. He felt
of her hair, her skin, the texture of the garment she wore and by
means of signs made her understand she was to open her mouth. In
the latter he seemed much interested, calling the attention of one
of the guards to her canine teeth and then baring his own sharp
fangs for the prisoner to see.

Presently he resumed pacing to and fro across the floor, and it
was fully fifteen minutes before he again noticed the prisoner, and
then it was to issue a curt order to her guards, who immediately
conducted her from the apartment.

The guards now led the girl through a series of corridors and
apartments to a narrow stone stairway which led to the floor above,
finally stopping before a small door where stood a naked Negro armed
with a spear. At a word from one of her guards the Negro opened the
door and the party passed into a low-ceiled apartment, the windows
of which immediately caught the girl's attention through the fact
that they were heavily barred. The room was furnished similarly to
those that she had seen in other parts of the building, the same
carved tables and benches, the rugs upon the floor, the decorations
upon the walls, although in every respect it was simpler than
anything she had seen on the floor below. In one corner was a low
couch covered with a rug similar to those on the floor except that
it was of a lighter texture, and upon this sat a woman.

As Bertha Kircher's eyes alighted upon the occupant of the room
the girl gave a little gasp of astonishment, for she recognized
immediately that here was a creature more nearly of her own kind
than any she had seen within the city's walls. An old woman it was
who looked at her through faded blue eyes, sunken deep in a wrinkled
and toothless face. But the eyes were those of a sane and intelligent
creature, and the wrinkled face was the face of a white woman.

At sight of the girl the woman rose and came forward, her gait so
feeble and unsteady that she was forced to support herself with a
long staff which she grasped in both her hands.  One of the guards
spoke a few words to her and then the men turned and left the
apartment. The girl stood just within the door waiting in silence
for what might next befall her.

The old woman crossed the room and stopped before her, raising
her weak and watery eyes to the fresh young face of the newcomer.
Then she scanned her from head to foot and once again the old eyes
returned to the girl's face. Bertha Kircher on her part was not
less frank in her survey of the little old woman. It was the latter
who spoke first. In a thin, cracked voice she spoke, hesitatingly,
falteringly, as though she were using unfamiliar words and speaking
a strange tongue.

"You are from the outer world?" she asked in English.  "God grant
that you may speak and understand this tongue."

"English?" the girl exclaimed, "Yes, of course, I speak English."

"Thank God!" cried the little old woman. "I did not know whether I
myself might speak it so that another could understand. For sixty
years I have spoken only their accursed gibberish. For sixty years
I have not heard a word in my native language. Poor creature! Poor
creature!" she mumbled.  "What accursed misfortune threw you into
their hands?"

"You are an English woman?" asked Bertha Kircher. "Did I understand
you aright that you are an English woman and have been here for
sixty years?"

The old woman nodded her head affirmatively. "For sixty years I
have never been outside of this palace. Come," she said, stretching
forth a bony hand. "I am very old and cannot stand long. Come and
sit with me on my couch."

The girl took the proffered hand and assisted the old lady back
to the opposite side of the room and when she was seated the girl
sat down beside her.

"Poor child! Poor child!" moaned the old woman. "Far better to have
died than to have let them bring you here. At first I might have
destroyed myself but there was always the hope that someone would
come who would take me away, but none ever comes. Tell me how they
got you."

Very briefly the girl narrated the principal incidents which led
up to her capture by some of the creatures of the city.

"Then there is a man with you in the city?" asked the old woman.

"Yes," said the girl, "but I do not know where he is nor what are
their intentions in regard to him. In fact, I do not know what
their intentions toward me are."

"No one might even guess," said the old woman. "They do not know
themselves from one minute to the next what their intentions are,
but I think you can rest assured, my poor child, that you will
never see your friend again."

"But they haven't slain you," the girl reminded her, "and you have
been their prisoner, you say, for sixty years."

"No," replied her companion, "they have not killed me, nor will
they kill you, though God knows before you have lived long in this
horrible place you will beg them to kill you."

"Who are they--" asked Bertha Kircher, "what kind of people? They
differ from any that I ever have seen. And tell me, too, how you
came here."

"It was long ago," said the old woman, rocking back and forth on
the couch. "It was long ago. Oh, how long it was!  I was only twenty
then. Think of it, child! Look at me. I have no mirror other than
my bath, I cannot see what I look like for my eyes are old, but
with my fingers I can feel my old and wrinkled face, my sunken eyes,
and these flabby lips drawn in over toothless gums. I am old and
bent and hideous, but then I was young and they said that I was
beautiful. No, I will not be a hypocrite; I was beautiful. My glass
told me that.

"My father was a missionary in the interior and one day there came
a band of Arabian slave raiders. They took the men and women of
the little native village where my father labored, and they took
me, too. They did not know much about our part of the country so
they were compelled to rely upon the men of our village whom they
had captured to guide them. They told me that they never before
had been so far south and that they had heard there was a country
rich in ivory and slaves west of us. They wanted to go there and
from there they would take us north, where I was to be sold into
the harem of some black sultan.

"They often discussed the price I would bring, and that that price
might not lessen, they guarded me jealously from one another so
the journeys were made as little fatiguing for me as possible. I
was given the best food at their command and I was not harmed.

"But after a short time, when we had reached the confines of the
country with which the men of our village were familiar and had
entered upon a desolate and arid desert waste, the Arabs realized
at last that we were lost. But they still kept on, ever toward
the west, crossing hideous gorges and marching across the face of
a burning land beneath the pitiless sun. The poor slaves they had
captured were, of course, compelled to carry all the camp equipage
and loot and thus heavily burdened, half starved and without water,
they soon commenced to die like flies.

"We had not been in the desert land long before the Arabs were
forced to kill their horses for food, and when we reached the first
gorge, across which it would have been impossible to transport the
animals, the balance of them were slaughtered and the meat loaded
upon the poor staggering blacks who still survived.

"Thus we continued for two more days and now all but a handful of
blacks were dead, and the Arabs themselves had commenced to succumb
to hunger and thirst and the intense heat of the desert. As far as
the eye could reach back toward the land of plenty from whence we
had come, our route was marked by circling vultures in the sky and
by the bodies of the dead who lay down in the trackless waste for
the last time. The ivory had been abandoned tusk by tusk as the
blacks gave out, and along the trail of death was strewn the camp
equipage and the horse trappings of a hundred men.

"For some reason the Arab chief favored me to the last, possibly
with the idea that of all his other treasures I could be most easily
transported, for I was young and strong and after the horses were
killed I had walked and kept up with the best of the men. We English,
you know, are great walkers, while these Arabians had never walked
since they were old enough to ride a horse.

"I cannot tell you how much longer we kept on but at last, with
our strength almost gone, a handful of us reached the bottom of a
deep gorge. To scale the opposite side was out of the question and
so we kept on down along the sands of what must have been the bed
of an ancient river, until finally we came to a point where we
looked out upon what appeared to be a beautiful valley in which we
felt assured that we would find game in plenty.

"By then there were only two of us left--the chief and myself. I
do not need to tell you what the valley was, for you found it in
much the same way as I did. So quickly were we captured that it
seemed they must have been waiting for us, and I learned later that
such was the case, just as they were waiting for you.

"As you came through the forest you must have seen the monkeys
and parrots and since you have entered the palace, how constantly
these animals, and the lions, are used in the decorations. At home
we were all familiar with talking parrots who repeated the things
that they were taught to say, but these parrots are different
in that they all talk in the same language that the people of the
city use, and they say that the monkeys talk to the parrots and the
parrots fly to the city and tell the people what the monkeys say.
And, although it is hard to believe, I have learned that this is
so, for I have lived here among them for sixty years in the palace
of their king.

"They brought me, as they brought you, directly to the palace. The
Arabian chief was taken elsewhere. I never knew what became of him.
Ago XXV was king then. I have seen many kings since that day. He
was a terrible man; but then, they are all terrible."

"What is the matter with them?" asked the girl.

"They are a race of maniacs," replied the old woman. "Had you not
guessed it? Among them are excellent craftsmen and good farmers
and a certain amount of law and order, such as it is.

"They reverence all birds, but the parrot is their chief deity.
There is one who is held here in the palace in a very beautiful
apartment. He is their god of gods. He is a very old bird. If what
Ago told me when I came is true, he must be nearly three hundred
years old by now. Their religious rites are revolting in the
extreme, and I believe that it may be the practice of these rites
through ages that has brought the race to its present condition of
imbecility.

"And yet, as I said, they are not without some redeeming qualities.
If legend may be credited, their forebears--a little handful of
men and women who came from somewhere out of the north and became
lost in the wilderness of central Africa--found here only a barren
desert valley. To my own knowledge rain seldom, if ever, falls
here, and yet you have seen a great forest and luxuriant vegetation
outside of the city as well as within. This miracle is accomplished
by the utilization of natural springs which their ancestors developed,
and upon which they have improved to such an extent that the entire
valley receives an adequate amount of moisture at all times.

"Ago told me that many generations before his time the forest was
irrigated by changing the course of the streams which carried the
spring water to the city but that when the trees had sent their
roots down to the natural moisture of the soil and required no
further irrigation, the course of the stream was changed and other
trees were planted. And so the forest grew until today it covers
almost the entire floor of the valley except for the open space
where the city stands. I do not know that this is true. It may be
that the forest has always been here, but it is one of their legends
and it is borne out by the fact that there is not sufficient rainfall
here to support vegetation.

"They are peculiar people in many respects, not only in their form
of worship and religious rites but also in that they breed lions
as other people breed cattle. You have seen how they use some of
these lions but the majority of them they fatten and eat. At first,
I imagine, they ate lion meat as a part of their religious ceremony
but after many generations they came to crave it so that now it is
practically the only flesh they eat. They would, of course, rather
die than eat the flesh of a bird, nor will they eat monkey's meat,
while the herbivorous animals they raise only for milk, hides,
and flesh for the lions.  Upon the south side of the city are the
corrals and pastures where the herbivorous animals are raised.
Boar, deer, and antelope are used principally for the lions, while
goats are kept for milk for the human inhabitants of the city."

"And you have lived here all these years," exclaimed the girl,
"without ever seeing one of your own kind?"

The old woman nodded affirmatively.

"For sixty years you have lived here," continued Bertha Kircher,
"and they have not harmed you!"

"I did not say they had not harmed me," said the old woman, "they
did not kill me, that is all."

"What"--the girl hesitated--"what," she continued at last, "was
your position among them? Pardon me," she added quickly, "I think
I know but I should like to hear from your own lips, for whatever
your position was, mine will doubtless be the same."

The old woman nodded. "Yes," she said, "doubtless; if they can keep
you away from the women."

"What do you mean?" asked the girl.

"For sixty years I have never been allowed near a woman.  They would
kill me, even now, if they could reach me. The men are frightful,
God knows they are frightful! But heaven keep you from the women!"

"You mean," asked the girl, "that the men will not harm me?"

"Ago XXV made me his queen," said the old woman. "But he had many
other queens, nor were they all human. He was not murdered for ten
years after I came here. Then the next king took me, and so it has
been always. I am the oldest queen now. Very few of their women live
to a great age. Not only are they constantly liable to assassination
but, owing to their subnormal mentalities, they are subject to
periods of depression during which they are very likely to destroy
themselves."

She turned suddenly and pointed to the barred windows.  "You see
this room," she said, "with the black eunuch outside? Wherever
you see these you will know that there are women, for with very
few exceptions they are never allowed out of captivity. They are
considered and really are more violent than the men."

For several minutes the two sat in silence, and then the younger
woman turned to the older.

"Is there no way to escape?" she asked.

The old woman pointed again to the barred windows and then to the
door, saying: "And there is the armed eunuch.  And if you should
pass him, how could you reach the street?  And if you reached the
street,  how could you pass through the city to the outer wall? And
even if, by some miracle, you should gain the outer wall, and, by
another miracle, you should be permitted to pass through the gate,
could you ever hope to traverse the forest where the great black
lions roam and feed upon men? No!" she exclaimed, answering her
own question, "there is no escape, for after one had escaped from
the palace and the city and the forest it would be but to invite
death in the frightful desert land beyond.

"In sixty years you are the first to find this buried city. In
a thousand no denizen of this valley has ever left it, and within
the memory of man, or even in their legends, none had found them
prior to my coming other than a single warlike giant, the story of
whom has been handed down from father to son.

"I think from the description that he must have been a Spaniard,
a giant of a man in buckler and helmet, who fought his way through
the terrible forest to the city gate, who fell upon those who were
sent out to capture him and slew them with his mighty sword. And
when he had eaten of the vegetables from the gardens, and the fruit
from the trees and drank of the water from the stream, he turned
about and fought his way back through the forest to the mouth of
the gorge. But though he escaped the city and the forest he did
not escape the desert. For a legend runs that the king, fearful
that he would bring others to attack them, sent a party after him
to slay him.

"For three weeks they did not find him, for they went in the wrong
direction, but at last they came upon his bones picked clean by
the vultures, lying a day's march up the same gorge through which
you and I entered the valley. I do not know," continued the old
woman, "that this is true. It is just one of their many legends."

"Yes," said the girl, "it is true. I am sure it is true, for I have
seen the skeleton and the corroded armor of this great giant."

At this juncture the door was thrown open without ceremony and a
Negro entered bearing two flat vessels in which were several smaller
ones. These he set down on one of the tables near the women, and,
without a word, turned and left. With the entrance of the man
with the vessels, a delightful odor of cooked food had aroused the
realization in the girl's mind that she was very hungry, and at
a word from the old woman she walked to the table to examine the
viands. The larger vessels which contained the smaller ones were
of pottery while those within them were quite evidently of hammered
gold. To her intense surprise she found lying between the smaller
vessels a spoon and a fork, which, while of quaint design, were quite
as serviceable as any she had seen in more civilized communities.
The tines of the fork were quite evidently of iron or steel, the
girl did not know which, while the handle and the spoon were of
the same material as the smaller vessels.

There was a highly seasoned stew with meat and vegetables, a dish
of fresh fruit, and a bowl of milk beside which was a little jug
containing something which resembled marmalade.  So ravenous was she
that she did not even wait for her companion to reach the table,
and as she ate she could have sworn that never before had she tasted
more palatable food. The old woman came slowly and sat down on one
of the benches opposite her.

As she removed the smaller vessels from the larger and arranged
them before her on the table a crooked smile twisted her lips as
she watched the younger woman eat.

"Hunger is a great leveler," she said with a laugh.

"What do you mean?" asked the girl.

"I venture to say that a few weeks ago you would have been nauseated
at the idea of eating cat."

"Cat?" exclaimed the girl.

"Yes," said the old woman. "What is the difference--a lion is a
cat."

"You mean I am eating lion now?"

"Yes," said the old woman, "and as they prepare it, it is very
palatable. You will grow very fond of it."

Bertha Kircher smiled a trifle dubiously. "I could not tell it,"
she said, "from lamb or veal."

"No," said the woman, "it tastes as good to me. But these lions
are very carefully kept and very carefully fed and their flesh is
so seasoned and prepared that it might be anything so far as taste
is concerned."

And so Bertha Kircher broke her long fast upon strange fruits, lion
meat, and goat's milk.

Scarcely had she finished when again the door opened and there
entered a yellow-coated soldier. He spoke to the old woman.

"The king," she said, "has commanded that you be prepared and brought
to him. You are to share these apartments with me. The king knows
that I am not like his other women. He never would have dared to
put you with them. Herog XVI has occasional lucid intervals. You
must have been brought to him during one of these. Like the rest
of them he thinks that he alone of all the community is sane, but
more than once I have thought that the various men with whom I have
come in contact here, including the kings themselves, looked upon
me as, at least, less mad than the others. Yet how I have retained
my senses all these years is beyond me."

"What do you mean by prepare?" asked Bertha Kircher.  "You said
that the king had commanded I be prepared and brought to him."

"You will be bathed and furnished with a robe similar to that which
I wear."

"Is there no escape?" asked the girl. "Is there no way even in
which I can kill myself?"

The woman handed her the fork. "This is the only way," she said,
"and you will notice that the tines are very short and blunt."

The girl shuddered and the old woman laid a hand gently upon her
shoulder. "He may only look at you and send you away," she said.
"Ago XXV sent for me once, tried to talk with me, discovered
that I could not understand him and that he could not understand
me, ordered that I be taught the language of his people, and then
apparently forgot me for a year. Sometimes I do not see the king
for a long period.  There was one king who ruled for five years
whom I never saw.  There is always hope; even I whose very memory
has doubtless been forgotten beyond these palace walls still hope,
though none knows better how futilely."

The old woman led Bertha Kircher to an adjoining apartment in
the floor of which was a pool of water. Here the girl bathed and
afterward her companion brought her one of the clinging garments
of the native women and adjusted it about her figure. The material
of the robe was of a gauzy fabric which accentuated the rounded
beauty of the girlish form.

"There," said the old woman, as she gave a final pat to one of the
folds of the garment, "you are a queen indeed!"

The girl looked down at her naked breasts and but half-concealed
limbs in horror. "They are going to lead me into the presence of
men in this half-nude condition!" she exclaimed.

The old woman smiled her crooked smile. "It is nothing," she said.
"You will become accustomed to it as did I who was brought up in
the home of a minister of the gospel, where it was considered little
short of a crime for a woman to expose her stockinged ankle. By
comparison with what you will doubtless see and the things that
you may be called upon to undergo, this is but a trifle."

For what seemed hours to the distraught girl she paced the floor
of her apartment, awaiting the final summons to the presence of the
mad king. Darkness had fallen and the oil flares within the palace
had been lighted long before two messengers appeared with instructions
that Herog demanded her immediate presence and that the old woman,
whom they called Xanila, was to accompany her. The girl felt some
slight relief when she discovered that she was to have at least
one friend with her, however powerless to assist her the old woman
might be.

The messengers conducted the two to a small apartment on the floor
below. Xanila explained that this was one of the anterooms off
the main throneroom in which the king was accustomed to hold court
with his entire retinue. A number of yellow-tunicked warriors sat
about upon the benches within the room. For the most part their
eyes were bent upon the floor and their attitudes that of moody
dejection. As the two women entered several glanced indifferently
at them, but for the most part no attention was paid to them.

While they were waiting in the anteroom there entered from another
apartment a young man uniformed similarly to the others with the
exception that upon his head was a fillet of gold, in the front of
which a single parrot feather rose erectly above his forehead. As
he entered, the other soldiers in the room rose to their feet.

"That is Metak, one of the king's sons," Xanila whispered to the
girl.

The prince was crossing the room toward the audience chamber when
his glance happened to fall upon Bertha Kircher. He halted in his
tracks and stood looking at her for a full minute without speaking.
The girl, embarrassed by his bold stare and her scant attire, flushed
and, dropping her gaze to the floor, turned away. Metak suddenly
commenced to tremble from head to foot and then, without warning
other than a loud, hoarse scream he sprang forward and seized the
girl in his arms.

Instantly pandemonium ensued. The two messengers who had been charged
with the duty of conducting the girl to the king's presence danced,
shrieking, about the prince, waving their arms and gesticulating
wildly as though they would force him to relinquish her, the
while they dared not lay hands upon royalty. The other guardsmen,
as though suffering in sympathy the madness of their prince, ran
forward screaming and brandishing their sabers.

The girl fought to release herself from the horrid embrace of the
maniac, but with his left arm about her he held her as easily as
though she had been but a babe, while with his free hand he drew
his saber and struck viciously at those nearest him.

One of the messengers was the first to feel the keen edge of
Metak's blade. With a single fierce cut the prince drove through
the fellow's collar bone and downward to the center of his chest.
With a shrill shriek that rose above the screaming of the other
guardsmen the man dropped to the floor, and as the blood gushed
from the frightful wound he struggled to rise once more to his feet
and then sank back again and died in a great pool of his own blood.

In the meantime Metak, still clinging desperately to the girl,
had backed toward the opposite door. At the sight of the blood two
of the guardsmen, as though suddenly aroused to maniacal frenzy,
dropped their sabers to the floor and fell upon each other with
nails and teeth, while some sought to reach the prince and some
to defend him. In a corner of the room sat one of the guardsmen
laughing uproariously and just as Metak succeeded in reaching the
door and taking the girl through, she thought that she saw another
of the men spring upon the corpse of the dead messenger and bury
his teeth in its flesh.

During the orgy of madness Xanila had kept closely at the girl's
side but at the door of the room Metak had seen her and, wheeling
suddenly, cut viciously at her. Fortunately for Xanila she was
halfway through the door at the time, so that Metak's blade but
dented itself upon the stone arch of the portal, and then Xanila,
guided doubtless by the wisdom of sixty years of similar experiences,
fled down the corridor as fast as her old and tottering legs would
carry her.

Metak, once outside the door, returned his saber to its scabbard
and lifting the girl bodily from the ground carried her off in the
opposite direction from that taken by Xanila.




Chapter XX

Came Tarzan


Just before dark that evening, an almost exhausted flier entered
the headquarters of Colonel Capell of the Second Rhodesians and
saluted.

"Well, Thompson," asked the superior, "what luck? The others have
all returned. Never saw a thing of Oldwick or his plane. I guess
we shall have to give it up unless you were more successful."

"I was," replied the young officer. "I found the plane."

"No!" ejaculated Colonel Capell. "Where was it? Any sign of Oldwick?"

"It is in the rottenest hole in the ground you ever saw, quite a
bit inland. Narrow gorge. Saw the plane all right but can't reach
it. There was a regular devil of a lion wandering around it. I
landed near the edge of the cliff and was going to climb down and
take a look at the plane. But this fellow hung around for an hour
or more and I finally had to give it up."

"Do you think the lions got Oldwick?" asked the colonel.

"I doubt it," replied Lieutenant Thompson, "from the fact that there
was no indication that the lion had fed anywhere about the plane.
I arose after I found it was impossible to get down around the
plane and reconnoitered up and down the gorge. Several miles to the
south I found a small, wooded valley in the center of which--please
don't think me crazy, sir--is a regular city--streets, buildings,
a central plaza with a lagoon, good-sized buildings with domes and
minarets and all that sort of stuff."

The elder officer looked at the younger compassionately.  "You're
all wrought up, Thompson," he said. "Go and take a good sleep. You
have been on this job now for a long while and it must have gotten
on your nerves."

The young man shook his head a bit irritably. "Pardon me, sir," he
said, "but I am telling you the truth. I am not mistaken. I circled
over the place several times. It may be that Oldwick has found his
way there--or has been captured by these people."

"Were there people in the city?" asked the colonel.

"Yes, I saw them in the streets."

"Do you think cavalry could reach the valley?" asked the colonel.

"No," replied Thompson, "the country is all cut up with these
deep gorges. Even infantry would have a devil of a time of it, and
there is absolutely no water that I could discover for at least a
two days' march."

It was at this juncture that a big Vauxhall drew up in front of the
headquarters of the Second Rhodesians and a moment later General
Smuts alighted and entered. Colonel Capell arose from his chair and
saluted his superior, and the young lieutenant saluted and stood
at attention.

"I was passing," said the general, "and I thought I would stop for
a chat. By the way, how is the search for Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick
progressing? I see Thompson here and I believe he was one of those
detailed to the search."

"Yes," said Capell, "he was. He is the last to come in. He found the
lieutenant's ship," and then he repeated what Lieutenant Thompson
had reported to him. The general sat down at the table with Colonel
Capell, and together the two officers, with the assistance of the
flier, marked the approximate location of the city which Thompson
had reported he'd discovered.

"It's a mighty rough country," remarked Smuts, "but we can't leave
a stone unturned until we have exhausted every resource to find
that boy. We will send out a small force; a small one will be more
likely to succeed than a large one. About one company, Colonel,
or say two, with sufficient motor lorries for transport of rations
and water. Put a good man in command and let him establish a base
as far to the west as the motors can travel. You can leave one
company there and send the other forward. I am inclined to believe
you can establish your base within a day's march of the city and
if such is the case the force you send ahead should have no trouble
on the score of lack of water as there certainly must be water
in the valley where the city lies. Detail a couple of planes for
reconnaissance and messenger service so that the base can keep in
touch at all times with the advance party. When can your force move
out?"

"We can load the lorries tonight," replied Capell, "and march about
one o'clock tomorrow morning."

"Good," said the general, "keep me advised," and returning the
others' salutes he departed.

As Tarzan leaped for the vines he realized that the lion was
close upon him and that his life depended upon the strength of the
creepers clinging to the city walls; but to his intense relief he
found the stems as large around as a man's arm, and the tendrils
which had fastened themselves to the wall so firmly fixed, that his
weight upon the stem appeared to have no appreciable effect upon
them.

He heard Numa's baffled roar as the lion slipped downward clawing
futilely at the leafy creepers, and then with the agility of the
apes who had reared him, Tarzan bounded nimbly aloft to the summit
of the wall.

A few feet below him was the flat roof of the adjoining building
and as he dropped to it his back was toward the niche from which
an embrasure looked out upon the gardens and the forest beyond, so
that he did not see the figure crouching there in the dark shadow.
But if he did not see he was not long in ignorance of the fact that
he was not alone, for scarcely had his feet touched the roof when
a heavy body leaped upon him from behind and brawny arms encircled
him about the waist.

Taken at a disadvantage and lifted from his feet, the ape-man was,
for the time being, helpless. Whatever the creature was that had
seized him, it apparently had a well-defined purpose in mind, for
it walked directly toward the edge of the roof so that it was soon
apparent to Tarzan that he was to be hurled to the pavement below--a
most efficacious manner of disposing of an intruder. That he would
be either maimed or killed the ape-man was confident; but he had
no intention of permitting his assailant to carry out the plan.

Tarzan's arms and legs were free but he was in such a disadvantageous
position that he could not use them to any good effect. His only
hope lay in throwing the creature off its balance, and to this end
Tarzan straightened his body and leaned as far back against his
captor as he could, and then suddenly lunged forward. The result was
as satisfactory as he could possibly have hoped. The great weight
of the ape-man thrown suddenly out from an erect position caused
the other also to lunge violently forward with the result that to
save himself he involuntarily released his grasp. Catlike in his
movements, the ape-man had no sooner touched the roof than he was
upon his feet again, facing his adversary, a man almost as large
as himself and armed with a saber which he now whipped from its
scabbard. Tarzan, however, had no mind to allow the use of this
formidable weapon and so he dove for the other's legs beneath the
vicious cut that was directed at him from the side, and as a football
player tackles an opposing runner, Tarzan tackled his antagonist,
carrying him backward several yards and throwing him heavily to
the roof upon his back.

No sooner had the man touched the roof than the ape-man was upon
his chest, one brawny hand sought and found the sword wrist and
the other the throat of the yellow-tunicked guardsman. Until then
the fellow had fought in silence but just as Tarzan's fingers
touched his throat he emitted a single piercing shriek that the
brown fingers cut off almost instantly.  The fellow struggled to
escape the clutch of the naked creature upon his breast but equally
as well might he have fought to escape the talons of Numa, the
lion.

Gradually his struggles lessened, his pin-point eyes popped from
their sockets, rolling horribly upward, while from his foam-flecked
lips his swollen tongue protruded. As his struggles ceased Tarzan
arose, and placing a foot upon the carcass of his kill, was upon
the point of screaming forth his victory cry when the thought that
the work before him required the utmost caution sealed his lips.

Walking to the edge of the roof he looked down into the narrow,
winding street below. At intervals, apparently at each street
intersection, an oil flare sputtered dimly from brackets set
in the walls a trifle higher than a man's head. For the most part
the winding alleys were in dense shadow and even in the immediate
vicinity of the flares the illumination was far from brilliant.
In the restricted area of his vision he could see that there were
still a few of the strange inhabitants moving about the narrow
thoroughfares.

To prosecute his search for the young officer and the girl he must
be able to move about the city as freely as possible, but to pass
beneath one of the corner flares, naked as he was except for a
loin cloth, and in every other respect markedly different from the
inhabitants of the city, would be but to court almost immediate
discovery. As these thoughts flashed through his mind and he cast
about for some feasible plan of action, his eyes fell upon the
corpse upon the roof near him, and immediately there occurred to
him the possibility of disguising himself in the raiment of his
conquered adversary.

It required but a few moments for the ape-man to clothe himself
in the tights, sandals, and parrot emblazoned yellow tunic of the
dead soldier. Around his waist he buckled the saber belt but beneath
the tunic he retained the hunting knife of his dead father. His
other weapons he could not lightly discard, and so, in the hope
that he might eventually recover them, he carried them to the edge
of the wall and dropped them among the foliage at its base. At the
last moment he found it difficult to part with his rope, which,
with his knife, was his most accustomed weapon, and one which he
had used for the greatest length of time. He found that by removing
the saber belt he could wind the rope about his waist beneath his
tunic, and then replacing the belt still retain it entirely concealed
from chance observation.

At last, satisfactorily disguised, and with even his shock of black
hair adding to the verisimilitude of his likeness to the natives
of the city, he sought for some means of reaching the street below.
While he might have risked a drop from the eaves of the roof he
feared to do so lest he attract the attention of passers-by, and
probable discovery. The roofs of the buildings varied in height but
as the ceilings were all low he found that he could easily travel
along the roof tops and this he did for some little distance, until
he suddenly discovered just ahead of him several figures reclining
upon the roof of a near-by building.

He had noticed openings in each roof, evidently giving ingress to
the apartments below, and now, his advance cut off by those ahead
of him, he decided to risk the chance of reaching the street
through the interior of one of the buildings. Approaching one of
the openings he leaned over the black hole, and listened for sounds
of life in the apartment below. Neither his ears nor his nose
registered evidence of the presence of any living creature in the
immediate vicinity, and so without further hesitation the ape-man
lowered his body through the aperture and was about to drop
when his foot came in contact with the rung of a ladder, which he
immediately took advantage of to descend to the floor of the room
below.

Here, all was almost total darkness until his eyes became accustomed
to the interior, the darkness of which was slightly alleviated
by the reflected light from a distant street flare which shone
intermittently through the narrow windows fronting the thoroughfare.
Finally, assured that the apartment was unoccupied, Tarzan sought
for a stairway to the ground floor.  This he found in a dark hallway
upon which the room opened--a flight of narrow stone steps leading
downward toward the street. Chance favored him so that he reached
the shadows of the arcade without encountering any of the inmates
of the house.

Once on the street he was not at a loss as to the direction in which
he wished to go, for he had tracked the two Europeans practically
to the gate, which he felt assured must have given them entry to
the city. His keen sense of direction and location made it possible
for him to judge with considerable accuracy the point within the
city where he might hope to pick up the spoor of those whom he
sought.

The first need, however, was to discover a street paralleling the
northern wall along which he could make his way in the direction of
the gate he had seen from the forest. Realizing that his greatest
hope of success lay in the boldness of his operations he moved off
in the direction of the nearest street flare without making any
other attempt at concealment than keeping in the shadows of the
arcade, which he judged would draw no particular attention to him
in that he saw other pedestrians doing likewise. The few he passed
gave him no heed, and he had almost reached the nearest intersection
when he saw several men wearing yellow tunics identical to that
which he had taken from his prisoner.

They were coming directly toward him and the ape-man saw that should
he continue on he would meet them directly at the intersection
of the two streets in the full light of the flare. His first
inclination was to go steadily on, for personally he had no objection
to chancing a scrimmage with them; but a sudden recollection of the
girl, possibly a helpless prisoner in the hands of these people,
caused him to seek some other and less hazardous plan of action.

He had almost emerged from the shadow of the arcade into the full
light of the flare and the approaching men were but a few yards
from him, when he suddenly kneeled and pretended to adjust the
wrappings of his sandals--wrappings, which, by the way, he was
not at all sure that he had adjusted as their makers had intended
them to be adjusted. He was still kneeling when the soldiers came
abreast of him. Like the others he had passed they paid no attention
to him and the moment they were behind him he continued upon his
way, turning to the right at the intersection of the two streets.

The street he now took was, at this point, so extremely winding
that, for the most part, it received no benefit from the flares at
either corner, so that he was forced practically to grope his way
in the dense shadows of the arcade. The street became a little
straighter just before he reached the next flare, and as he came
within sight of it he saw silhouetted against a patch of light the
figure of a lion. The beast was coming slowly down the street in
Tarzan's direction.

A woman crossed the way directly in front of it and the lion paid
no attention to her, nor she to the lion. An instant later a little
child ran after the woman and so close did he run before the lion
that the beast was forced to turn out of its way a step to avoid
colliding with the little one. The ape-man grinned and crossed
quickly to the opposite side of the street, for his delicate senses
indicated that at this point the breeze stirring through the city
streets and deflected by the opposite wall would now blow from the
lion toward him as the beast passed, whereas if he remained upon
the side of the street upon which he had been walking when he
discovered the carnivore, his scent would have been borne to the
nostrils of the animal, and Tarzan was sufficiently jungle-wise
to realize that while he might deceive the eyes of man and beast
he could not so easily disguise from the nostrils of one of the
great cats that he was a creature of a different species from the
inhabitants of the city, the only human beings, possibly, that Numa
was familiar with.  In him the cat would recognize a stranger, and,
therefore, an enemy, and Tarzan had no desire to be delayed by an
encounter with a savage lion. His ruse worked successfully, the
lion passing him with not more than a side glance in his direction.

He had proceeded for some little distance and had about reached a
point where he judged he would find the street which led up from
the city gate when, at an intersection of two streets, his nostrils
caught the scent spoor of the girl. Out of a maze of other scent
spoors the ape-man picked the familiar odor of the girl and, a second
later, that of Smith-Oldwick.  He had been forced to accomplish
it, however, by bending very low at each street intersection in
repeated attention to his sandal wrappings, bringing his nostrils
as close to the pavement as possible.

As he advanced along the street through which the two had been
conducted earlier in the day he noted, as had they, the change
in the type of buildings as he passed from a residence district
into that portion occupied by shops and bazaars. Here the number
of flares was increased so that they appeared not only at street
intersections but midway between as well, and there were many
more people abroad. The shops were open and lighted, for with the
setting of the sun the intense heat of the day had given place to
a pleasant coolness. Here also the number of lions, roaming loose
through the thoroughfares, increased, and also for the first time
Tarzan noted the idiosyncrasies of the people.

Once he was nearly upset by a naked man running rapidly through
the street screaming at the top of his voice. And again he nearly
stumbled over a woman who was making her way in the shadows of one
of the arcades upon all fours. At first the ape-man thought she was
hunting for something she had dropped, but as he drew to one side
to watch her, he saw that she was doing nothing of the kind--that
she had merely elected to walk upon her hands and knees rather
than erect upon her feet. In another block he saw two creatures
struggling upon the roof of an adjacent building until finally one
of them, wrenching himself free from the grasp of the other, gave
his adversary a mighty push which hurled him to the pavement below,
where he lay motionless upon the dusty road. For an instant a wild
shriek re-echoed through the city from the lungs of the victor and
then, without an instant's hesitation, the fellow leaped headfirst
to the street beside the body of his victim. A lion moved out from
the dense shadows of a doorway and approached the two bloody and
lifeless things before him. Tarzan wondered what effect the odor
of blood would have upon the beast and was surprised to see that
the animal only sniffed at the corpses and the hot red blood and
then lay down beside the two dead men.

He had passed the lion but a short distance when his attention was
called to the figure of a man lowering himself laboriously from the
roof of a building upon the east side of the thoroughfare. Tarzan's
curiosity was aroused.




Chapter XXI

In the Alcove


As Smith-Oldwick realized that he was alone and practically defenseless
in an enclosure filled with great lions  he was, in his weakened
condition, almost in a state verging upon hysterical terror.
Clinging to the grating for support he dared not turn his head in
the direction of the beasts behind him. He felt his knees giving
weakly beneath him. Something within his head spun rapidly around.
He became very dizzy and nauseated and then suddenly all went
black before his eyes as his limp body collapsed at the foot of
the grating.

How long he lay there unconscious he never knew; but as reason
slowly reasserted itself in his semi-conscious state he was aware
that he lay in a cool bed upon the whitest of linen in a bright
and cheery room, and that upon one side close to him was an open
window, the delicate hangings of which were fluttering in a soft
summer breeze which blew in from a sun-kissed orchard of ripening
fruit which he could see without--an old orchard in which soft,
green grass grew between the laden trees, and where the sun filtered
through the foliage; and upon the dappled greensward a little child
was playing with a frolicsome puppy.

"God," thought the man, "what a horrible nightmare I have passed
through!" and then he felt a hand stroking his brow and cheek--a
cool and gentle hand that smoothed away his troubled recollections.
For a long minute Smith-Oldwick lay in utter peace and content
until gradually there was forced upon his sensibilities the fact
that the hand had become rough, and that it was no longer cool but
hot and moist; and suddenly he opened his eyes and looked up into
the face of a huge lion.

Lieutenant Harold Percy Smith-Oldwick was not only an English
gentleman and an officer in name, he was also what these implied--a
brave man; but when he realized that the sweet picture he had looked
upon was but the figment of a dream, and that in reality he still
lay where he had fallen at the foot of the grating with a lion
standing over him licking his face, the tears sprang to his eyes
and ran down his cheeks.  Never, he thought, had an unkind fate
played so cruel a joke upon a human being.

For some time he lay feigning death while the lion, having ceased
to lick him, sniffed about his body. There are some things than which
death is to be preferred; and there came at last to the Englishman
the realization that it would be better to die swiftly than to
lie in this horrible predicament until his mind broke beneath the
strain and he went mad.

And so, deliberately and without haste, he rose, clinging to the
grating for support. At his first move the lion growled, but after
that he paid no further attention to the man, and when at last
Smith-Oldwick had regained his feet the lion moved indifferently
away. Then it was that the man turned and looked about the enclosure.

Sprawled beneath the shade of the trees and lying upon the long bench
beside the south wall the great beasts rested, with the exception
of two or three who moved restlessly about. It was these that the
man feared and yet when two more of them had passed him by he began
to feel reassured, recalling the fact that they were accustomed to
the presence of man.

And yet he dared not move from the grating. As the man examined his
surroundings he noted that the branches of one of the trees near
the further wall spread close beneath an open window. If he could
reach that tree and had strength to do so, he could easily climb
out upon the branch and escape, at least, from the enclosure of the
lions. But in order to reach the tree he must pass the full length
of the enclosure, and at the very bole of the tree itself two lions
lay sprawled out in slumber.

For half an hour the man stood gazing longingly at this seeming
avenue of escape, and at last, with a muttered oath, he straightened
up and throwing back his shoulders in a gesture of defiance, he
walked slowly and deliberately down the center of the courtyard.
One of the prowling lions turned from the side wall and moved
toward the center directly in the man's path, but Smith-Oldwick was
committed to what he considered his one chance, for even temporary
safety, and so he kept on, ignoring the presence of the beast. The
lion slouched to his side and sniffed him and then, growling, he
bared his teeth.

Smith-Oldwick drew the pistol from his shirt. "If he has made up
his mind to kill me," he thought. "I can't see that it will make
any difference in the long run whether I infuriate him or not. The
beggar can't kill me any deader in one mood than another."

But with the man's movement in withdrawing the weapon from his shirt
the lion's attitude suddenly altered and though he still growled
he turned and sprang away, and then at last the Englishman stood
almost at the foot of the tree that was his goal, and between him
and safety sprawled a sleeping lion.

Above him was a limb that ordinarily he could have leaped for and
reached with ease; but weak from his wounds and loss of blood he
doubted his ability to do so now. There was even a question as to
whether he would be able to ascend the tree at all. There was just
one chance: the lowest branch left the bole within easy reach of a
man standing on the ground close to the tree's stem, but to reach
a position where the branch would be accessible he must step over
the body of a lion.  Taking a deep breath he placed one foot between
the sprawled legs of the beast and gingerly raised the other to plant
it upon the opposite side of the tawny body. "What," he thought,
"if the beggar should happen to wake now?" The suggestion sent a
shudder through his frame but he did not hesitate or withdraw his
foot. Gingerly he planted it beyond the lion, threw his weight
forward upon it and cautiously brought his other foot to the side
of the first. He had passed and the lion had not awakened.

Smith-Oldwick was weak from loss of blood and the hardships he had
undergone, but the realization of his situation impelled him to a
show of agility and energy which he probably could scarcely have
equaled when in possession of his normal strength. With his life
depending upon the success of his efforts, he swung himself quickly
to the lower branches of the tree and scrambled upward out of reach
of possible harm from the lions below--though the sudden movement
in the branches above them awakened both the sleeping beasts. The
animals raised their heads and looked questioningly up for a moment
and then lay back again to resume their broken slumber.

So easily had the Englishman succeeded thus far that he suddenly
began to question as to whether he had at any time been in real
danger. The lions, as he knew, were accustomed to the presence of
men, but yet they were still lions and he was free to admit that
he breathed more easily now that he was safe above their clutches.

Before him lay the open window he had seen from the ground. He
was now on a level with it and could see an apparently unoccupied
chamber beyond, and toward this he made his way along a stout
branch that swung beneath the opening. It was not a difficult feat
to reach the window, and a moment later he drew himself over the
sill and dropped into the room.

He found himself in a rather spacious apartment, the floor of which
was covered with rugs of barbaric design, while the few pieces of
furniture were of a similar type to that which he had seen in the
room on the first floor into which he and Bertha Kircher had been
ushered at the conclusion of their journey.  At one end of the room
was what appeared to be a curtained alcove, the heavy hangings of
which completely hid the interior. In the wall opposite the window
and near the alcove was a closed door, apparently the only exit
from the room.

He could see, in the waning light without, that the close of the
day was fast approaching, and he hesitated while he deliberated the
advisability of waiting until darkness had fallen, or of immediately
searching for some means of escape from the building and the city.
He at last decided that it would do no harm to investigate beyond
the room, that he might have some idea as how best to plan his
escape after dark. To this end he crossed the room toward the door
but he had taken only a few steps when the hangings before the
alcove separated and the figure of a woman appeared in the opening.

She was young and beautifully formed; the single drapery wound around
her body from below her breasts left no detail of her symmetrical
proportions unrevealed, but her face was the face of an imbecile.
At sight of her Smith-Oldwick halted, momentarily expecting that
his presence would elicit screams for help from her. On the contrary
she came toward him smiling, and when she was close her slender,
shapely fingers touched the sleeve of his torn blouse as a curious
child might handle a new toy, and still with the same smile she
examined him from head to foot, taking in, in childish wonderment,
every detail of his apparel.

Presently she spoke to him in a soft, well-modulated voice which
contrasted sharply with her facial appearance. The voice and the
girlish figure harmonized perfectly and seemed to belong to each
other, while the head and face were those of another creature.
Smith-Oldwick could understand no word of what she said, but
nevertheless he spoke to her in his own cultured tone, the effect
of which upon her was evidently most gratifying, for before he
realized her intentions or could prevent her she had thrown both
arms about his neck and was kissing him with the utmost abandon.

The man tried to free himself from her rather surprising attentions,
but she only clung more tightly to him, and suddenly, as he recalled
that he had always heard that one must humor the mentally deficient,
and at the same time seeing in her a possible agency of escape, he
closed his eyes and returned her embraces.

It was at this juncture that the door opened and a man entered.
With the sound from the first movement of the latch, Smith-Oldwick
opened his eyes, but though he endeavored to disengage himself
from the girl he realized that the newcomer had seen their rather
compromising position. The girl, whose back was toward the door,
seemed at first not to realize that someone had entered, but when
she did she turned quickly and as her eyes fell upon the man whose
terrible face was now distorted with an expression of hideous rage
she turned, screaming, and fled toward the alcove. The Englishman,
flushed and embarrassed, stood where she had left him. With the
sudden realization of the futility of attempting an explanation,
came that of the menacing appearance of the man, whom he now
recognized as the official who had received them in the room below.
The fellow's face, livid with insane rage and, possibly, jealousy,
was twitching violently, accentuating the maniacal expression that
it habitually wore.

For a moment he seemed paralyzed by anger, and then with a loud
shriek that rose into an uncanny wail, he drew his curved saber
and sprang toward the Englishman. To Smith-Oldwick there seemed
no possible hope of escaping the keen-edged weapon in the hands of
the infuriated man, and though he felt assured that it would draw
down upon him an equally sudden and possibly more terrible death,
he did the only thing that remained for him to do--drew his pistol
and fired straight for the heart of the oncoming man. Without even
so much as a groan the fellow lunged forward upon the floor at
Smith-Oldwick's feet--killed instantly with a bullet through the
heart. For several seconds the silence of the tomb reigned in the
apartment.

The Englishman, standing over the prostrate figure of the dead
man, watched the door with drawn weapon, expecting momentarily to
hear the rush of feet of those whom he was sure would immediately
investigate the report of the pistol.  But no sounds came from below
to indicate that anyone there had heard the explosion, and presently
the man's attention was distracted from the door to the alcove,
between the hangings of which the face of the girl appeared. The
eyes were widely dilated and the lower jaw dropped in an expression
of surprise and awe.

The girl's gaze was riveted upon the figure upon the floor, and
presently she crept stealthily into the room and tiptoed toward
the corpse. She appeared as though constantly poised for flight,
and when she had come to within two or three feet of the body she
stopped and, looking up at Smith-Oldwick, voiced some interrogation
which he could not, of course, understand. Then she came close to
the side of the dead man and kneeling upon the floor felt gingerly
of the body.

Presently she shook the corpse by the shoulder, and then with a
show of strength which her tenderly girlish form belied, she turned
the body over on its back. If she had been in doubt before, one
glance at the hideous features set in death must have convinced
her that life was extinct, and with the realization there broke
from her lips peal after peal of mad, maniacal laughter as with her
little hands she beat upon the upturned face and breast of the dead
man. It was a gruesome sight from which the Englishman involuntarily
drew back--a gruesome, disgusting sight such as, he realized, might
never be witnessed outside a madhouse or this frightful city.

In the midst of her frenzied rejoicing at the death of the man,
and Smith-Oldwick could attribute her actions to no other cause,
she suddenly desisted from her futile attacks upon the insensate
flesh and, leaping to her feet, ran quickly to the door, where
she shot a wooden bolt into its socket, thus securing them from
interference from without. Then she returned to the center of the
room and spoke rapidly to the Englishman, gesturing occasionally
toward the body of the slain man. When he could not understand,
she presently became provoked and in a sudden hysteria of madness
she rushed forward as though to strike the Englishman. Smith-Oldwick
dropped back a few steps and leveled his pistol upon her. Mad though
she must have been, she evidently was not so mad but what she had
connected the loud report, the diminutive weapon, and the sudden
death of the man in whose house she dwelt, for she instantly desisted
and quite as suddenly as it had come upon her, her homicidal mood
departed.

Again the vacuous, imbecile smile took possession of her features,
and her voice, dropping its harshness, resumed the soft, well-modulated
tones with which she had first addressed him. Now she attempted by
signs to indicate her wishes, and motioning Smith-Oldwick to follow
her she went to the hangings and opening them disclosed the alcove.
It was rather more than an alcove, being a fair-sized room heavy
with rugs and hangings and soft, pillowed couches. Turning at the
entrance she pointed to the corpse upon the floor of the outer
room, and then crossing the alcove she raised some draperies which
covered a couch and fell to the floor upon all sides, disclosing
an opening beneath the furniture.

To this opening she pointed and then again to the corpse, indicating
plainly to the Englishman that it was her desire that the body be
hidden here. But if he had been in doubt, she essayed to dispel it
by grasping his sleeve and urging him in the direction of the body
which the two of them then lifted and half carried and half dragged
into the alcove. At first they encountered some difficulty when
they endeavored to force the body of the man into the small space
she had selected for it, but eventually they succeeded in doing
so. Smith-Oldwick was again impressed by the fiendish brutality of
the girl.  In the center of the room lay a blood-stained rug which
the girl quickly gathered up and draped over a piece of furniture
in such a way that the stain was hidden. By rearranging the other
rugs and by bringing one from the alcove she restored the room to
order so no outward indication of the tragedy so recently enacted
there was apparent.

These things attended to, and the hangings draped once more about
the couch that they might hide the gruesome thing beneath, the girl
once more threw her arms about the Englishman's neck and dragged him
toward the soft and luxurious pillows above the dead man. Acutely
conscious of the horror of his position, filled with loathing,
disgust, and an outraged sense of decency, Smith-Oldwick was also
acutely alive to the demands of self-preservation. He felt that
he was warranted in buying his life at almost any price; but there
was a point at which his finer nature rebelled.

It was at this juncture that a loud knock sounded upon the door of
the outer room. Springing from the couch, the girl seized the man
by the arm and dragged him after her to the wall close by the head
of the couch. Here she drew back one of the hangings, revealing a
little niche behind, into which she shoved the Englishman and dropped
the hangings before him, effectually hiding him from observation
from the rooms beyond.

He heard her cross the alcove to the door of the outer room, and
heard the bolt withdrawn followed by the voice of a man mingled
with that of the girl. The tones of both seemed rational so that
he might have been listening to an ordinary conversation in some
foreign tongue. Yet with the gruesome experiences of the day behind
him, he could not but momentarily expect some insane outbreak from
beyond the hangings.

He was aware from the sounds that the two had entered the alcove,
and, prompted by a desire to know what manner of man he might
next have to contend with, he slightly parted the heavy folds that
hid the two from his view and looking out saw them sitting on the
couch with their arms about each other, the girl with the same
expressionless smile upon her face that she had vouchsafed him.
He found he could so arrange the hangings that a very narrow slit
between two of them permitted him to watch the actions of those in
the alcove without revealing himself or increasing his liability
of detection.

He saw the girl lavishing her kisses upon the newcomer, a much
younger man than he whom Smith-Oldwick had dispatched. Presently
the girl disengaged herself from the embrace of her lover as though
struck by a sudden memory.  Her brows puckered as in labored thought
and then with a startled expression, she threw a glance backward
toward the hidden niche where the Englishman stood, after which she
whispered rapidly to her companion, occasionally jerking her head
in the direction of the niche and on several occasions making a
move with one hand and forefinger, which Smith-Oldwick could not
mistake as other than an attempt to describe his pistol and its
use.

It was evident then to him that she was betraying him, and without
further loss of time he turned his back toward the hangings and
commenced a rapid examination of his hiding place. In the alcove
the man and the girl whispered, and then cautiously and with great
stealth, the man rose and drew his curved saber. On tiptoe he
approached the hangings, the girl creeping at his side. Neither
spoke now, nor was there any sound in the room as the girl sprang
forward and with outstretched arm and pointing finger indicated
a point upon the curtain at the height of a man's breast. Then
she stepped to one side, and her companion, raising his blade to
a horizontal position, lunged suddenly forward and with the full
weight of his body and his right arm, drove the sharp point through
the hangings and into the niche behind for its full length.

Bertha Kircher, finding her struggles futile and realizing that she
must conserve her strength for some chance opportunity of escape,
desisted from her efforts to break from the grasp of Prince Metak
as the fellow fled with her through the dimly lighted corridors
of the palace. Through many chambers the prince fled, bearing his
prize. It was evident to the girl that, though her captor was the
king's son, he was not above capture and punishment for his deeds,
as otherwise he would not have shown such evident anxiety to escape
with her, as well as from the results of his act.

From the fact that he was constantly turning affrighted eyes behind
them, and glancing suspiciously into every nook and corner that
they passed, she guessed that the prince's punishment might be both
speedy and terrible were he caught.

She knew from their route that they must have doubled back several
times although she had quite lost all sense of direction; but she
did not know that the prince was as equally confused as she, and
that really he was running in an aimless, erratic manner, hoping
that he might stumble eventually upon a place of refuge.

Nor is it to be wondered at that this offspring of maniacs should
have difficulty in orienting himself in the winding mazes of a
palace designed by maniacs for a maniac king.  Now a corridor turned
gradually and almost imperceptibly in a new direction, again one
doubled back upon and crossed itself; here the floor rose gradually
to the level of another story, or again there might be a spiral
stairway down which the mad prince rushed dizzily with his burden.
Upon what floor they were or in what part of the palace even Metak
had no idea until, halting abruptly at a closed door, he pushed
it open to step into a brilliantly lighted chamber filled with
warriors, at one end of which sat the king upon a great throne;
beside this, to the girl's surprise, she saw another throne where
was seated a huge lioness, recalling to her the words of Xanila
which, at the time, had made no impression on her: "But he had many
other queens, nor were they all human."

At sight of Metak and the girl, the king rose from his throne and
started across the chamber, all semblance of royalty vanishing in
the maniac's uncontrollable passion. And as he came he shrieked
orders and commands at the top of his voice.  No sooner had Metak so
unwarily opened the door to this hornets' nest than he immediately
withdrew and, turning, fled again in a new direction. But now
a hundred men were close upon his heels, laughing, shrieking, and
possibly cursing. He dodged hither and thither, distancing them for
several minutes until, at the bottom of a long runway that inclined
steeply downward from a higher level, he burst into a subterranean
apartment lighted by many flares.

In the center of the room was a pool of considerable size, the
level of the water being but a few inches below the floor.  Those
behind the fleeing prince and his captive entered the chamber in
time to see Metak leap into the water with the girl and disappear
beneath the surface taking his captive with him, nor, though they
waited excitedly around the rim of the pool, did either of the two
again emerge.

When Smith-Oldwick turned to investigate his hiding place, his
hands, groping upon the rear wall, immediately came in contact with
the wooden panels of a door and a bolt such as that which secured
the door of the outer room. Cautiously and silently drawing the
wooden bar he pushed gently against the panel to find that the door
swung easily and noiselessly outward into utter darkness. Moving
carefully and feeling forward for each step he passed out of the
niche, closing the door behind him.

Feeling about, he discovered that he was in a narrow corridor which
he followed cautiously for a few yards to be brought up suddenly
by what appeared to be a ladder across the passageway. He felt of
the obstruction carefully with his hands until he was assured that
it was indeed a ladder and that a solid wall was just beyond it,
ending the corridor.  Therefore, as he could not go forward and as
the ladder ended at the floor upon which he stood, and as he did
not care to retrace his steps, there was no alternative but to climb
upward, and this he did, his pistol ready in a side pocket of his
blouse.

He had ascended but two or three rungs when his head came suddenly
and painfully in contact with a hard surface above him. Groping
about with one hand over his head he discovered that the obstacle
seemed to be the covering to a trap door in the ceiling which,
with a little effort, he succeeded in raising a couple of inches,
revealing through the cracks the stars of a clear African night.

With a sigh of relief, but with unabated caution, he gently slid
the trapdoor to one side far enough to permit him to raise his
eyes above the level of the roof. A quick glance assured him that
there was none near enough to observe his movements, nor, in fact,
as far as he could see, was anyone in sight.

Drawing himself quickly through the aperture he replaced the cover
and endeavored to regain his bearings. Directly to the south of him
the low roof he stood upon adjoined a much loftier portion of the
building, which rose several stories above his head. A few yards
to the west he could see the flickering light of the flares of a
winding street, and toward this he made his way.

From the edge of the roof he looked down upon the night life of
the mad city. He saw men and women and children and lions, and of
all that he saw it was quite evident to him that only the lions were
sane. With the aid of the stars he easily picked out the points of
the compass, and following carefully in his memory the steps that
had led him into the city and to the roof upon which he now stood,
he knew that the thoroughfare upon which he looked was the same
along which he and Bertha Kircher had been led as prisoners earlier
in the day.

If he could reach this he might be able to pass undetected in the
shadows of the arcade to the city gate. He had already given up as
futile the thought of seeking out the girl and attempting to succor
her, for he knew that alone and with the few remaining rounds of
ammunition he possessed, he could do nothing against this city-full
of armed men. That he could live to cross the lion-infested forest
beyond the city was doubtful, and having, by some miracle, won to
the desert beyond, his fate would be certainly sealed; but yet he
was consumed with but one desire--to leave behind him as far as
possible this horrid city of maniacs.

He saw that the roofs rose to the same level as that upon which
he stood unbroken to the north to the next street intersection.
Directly below him was a flare. To reach the pavement in safety
it was necessary that he find as dark a portion of the avenue as
possible. And so he sought along the edge of the roofs for a place
where he might descend in comparative concealment.

He had proceeded some little way beyond a point where the street curved
abruptly to the east before he discovered a location sufficiently
to his liking. But even here he was compelled to wait a considerable
time for a satisfactory moment for his descent, which he had
decided to make down one of the pillars of the arcade. Each time
he prepared to lower himself over the edge of the roofs, footsteps
approaching in one direction or another deterred him until at last
he had almost come to the conclusion that he would have to wait
for the entire city to sleep before continuing his flight.

But finally came a moment which he felt propitious and though
with inward qualms, it was with outward calm that he commenced the
descent to the street below.

When at last he stood beneath the arcade he was congratulating
himself upon the success that had attended his efforts up to this
point when, at a slight sound behind him, he turned to see a tall
figure in the yellow tunic of a warrior confronting him.




Chapter XXII

Out of the Niche


Numa, the lion, growled futilely in baffled rage as he slipped
back to the ground at the foot of the wall after his unsuccessful
attempt to drag down the fleeing ape-man. He poised to make a
second effort to follow his escaping quarry when his nose picked
up a hitherto unnoticed quality in the scent spoor of his intended
prey. Sniffing at the ground that Tarzan's feet had barely touched,
Numa's growl changed to a low whine, for he had recognized the
scent spoor of the man-thing that had rescued him from the pit of
the Wamabos.

What thoughts passed through that massive head? Who may say? But
now there was no indication of baffled rage as the great lion turned
and moved majestically eastward along the wall. At the eastern end
of the city he turned toward the south, continuing his way to the
south side of the wall along which were the pens and corrals where
the herbivorous flocks were fattened for the herds of domesticated
lions within the city. The great black lions of the forest fed
with almost equal impartiality upon the flesh of the grass-eaters
and man. Like Numa of the pit they occasionally made excursions across
the desert to the fertile valley of the Wamabos, but principally
they took their toll of meat from the herds of the walled city of
Herog, the mad king, or seized upon some of his luckless subjects.

Numa of the pit was in some respects an exception to the rule which
guided his fellows of the forest in that as a cub he had been
trapped and carried into the city, where he was kept for breeding
purposes, only to escape in his second year. They had tried to teach
him in the city of maniacs that he must not eat the flesh of man,
and the result of their schooling was that only when aroused to
anger or upon that one occasion that he had been impelled by the
pangs of hunger, did he ever attack man.

The animal corrals of the maniacs are protected by an outer wall
or palisade of upright logs, the lower ends of which are imbedded
in the ground, the logs themselves being placed as close together
as possible and further reinforced and bound together by withes.
At intervals there are gates through which the flocks are turned
on to the grazing land south of the city during the daytime. It is
at such times that the black lions of the forest take their greatest
toll from the herds, and it is infrequent that a lion attempts to
enter the corrals at night.  But Numa of the pit, having scented the
spoor of his benefactor, was minded again to pass into the walled
city, and with that idea in his cunning brain he crept stealthily
along the outer side of the palisade, testing each gateway with a
padded foot until at last he discovered one which seemed insecurely
fastened. Lowering his great head he pressed against the gate, surging
forward with all the weight of his huge body and the strength of
his giant sinews--one mighty effort and Numa was within the corral.

The enclosure contained a herd of goats which immediately upon the
advent of the carnivore started a mad stampede to the opposite end
of the corral which was bounded by the south wall of the city. Numa
had been within such a corral as this before, so that he knew that
somewhere in the wall was a small door through which the goatherd
might pass from the city to his flock; toward this door he made his
way, whether by plan or accident it is difficult to say, though in
the light of ensuing events it seems possible that the former was
the case.

To reach the gate he must pass directly through the herd which had
huddled affrightedly close to the opening so that once again there
was a furious rush of hoofs as Numa strode quickly to the side of
the portal. If Numa had planned, he had planned well, for scarcely
had he reached his position when the door opened and a herder's head
was projected into the enclosure, the fellow evidently seeking an
explanation of the disturbance among his flock. Possibly he discovered
the cause of the commotion, but it is doubtful, for it was dark
and the great, taloned paw that reached up and struck downward a
mighty blow that almost severed his head from his body, moved so
quickly and silently that the man was dead within a fraction of
a second from the moment that he opened the door, and then Numa,
knowing now his way, passed through the wall into the dimly lighted
streets of the city beyond.

Smith-Oldwick's first thought when he was accosted by the figure in
the yellow tunic of a soldier was to shoot the man dead and trust
to his legs and the dimly lighted, winding streets to permit his
escape, for he knew that to be accosted was equivalent to recapture
since no inhabitant of this weird city but would recognize him
as an alien. It would be a simple thing to shoot the man from the
pocket where the pistol lay without drawing the weapon, and with
this purpose in mind the Englishman slipped his hands into the
side pocket of his blouse, but simultaneously with this action his
wrist was seized in a powerful grasp and a low voice whispered in
English: "Lieutenant, it is I, Tarzan of the Apes."

The relief from the nervous strain under which he had been laboring
for so long, left Smith-Oldwick suddenly as weak as a babe, so that
he was forced to grasp the ape-man's arm for support--and when he
found his voice all he could do was to repeat: "You? You? I thought
you were dead!"

"No, not dead," replied Tarzan, "and I see that you are not either.
But how about the girl?"

"I haven't seen her," replied the Englishman, "since we were
brought here. We were taken into a building on the plaza close by
and there we were separated. She was led away by guards and I was
put into a den of lions. I haven't seen her since."

"How did you escape?" asked the ape-man.

"The lions didn't seem to pay much attention to me and I climbed
out of the place by way of a tree and through a window into a room
on the second floor. Had a little scrimmage there with a fellow and
was hidden by one of their women in a hole in the wall. The loony
thing then betrayed me to another bounder who happened in, but I
found a way out and up onto the roof where I have been for quite
some time now waiting for a chance to get down into the street
without being seen. That's all I know, but I haven't the slightest
idea in the world where to look for Miss Kircher."

"Where were you going now?" asked Tarzan.

Smith-Oldwick hesitated. "I--well, I couldn't do anything here
alone and I was going to try to get out of the city and in some
way reach the British forces east and bring help."

"You couldn't do it," said Tarzan. "Even if you got through the
forest alive you could never cross the desert country without food
or water."

"What shall we do, then?" asked the Englishman.

"We will see if we can find the girl," replied the ape-man, and
then, as though he had forgotten the presence of the Englishman and
was arguing to convince himself, "She may be a German and a spy,
but she is a woman--a white woman--I can't leave her here."

"But how are we going to find her?" asked the Englishman.

"I have followed her this far," replied Tarzan, "and unless I am
greatly mistaken I can follow her still farther."

"But I cannot accompany you in these clothes without exposing us
both to detection and arrest," argued Smith-Oldwick.

"We will get you other clothes, then," said Tarzan.

"How?" asked the Englishman.

"Go back to the roof beside the city wall where I entered," replied
the ape-man with a grim smile, "and ask the naked dead man there
how I got my disguise."

Smith-Oldwick looked quickly up at his companion. "I have it," he
exclaimed. "I know where there is a fellow who doesn't need his
clothes anymore, and if we can get back on this roof I think we can
find him and get his apparel without much resistance. Only a girl
and a young fellow whom we could easily surprise and overcome."

"What do you mean?" asked Tarzan. "How do you know that the man
doesn't need his clothes any more."

"I know he doesn't need them," replied the Englishman, "because I
killed him."

"Oh!" exclaimed the ape-man, "I see. I guess it might be easier
that way than to tackle one of these fellows in the street where
there is more chance of our being interrupted."

"But how are we going to reach the roof again, after all?" queried
Smith-Oldwick.

"The same way you came down," replied Tarzan. "This roof is low
and there is a little ledge formed by the capital of each column;
I noticed that when you descended. Some of the buildings wouldn't
have been so easy to negotiate."

Smith-Oldwick looked up toward the eaves of the low roof.  "It's
not very high," he said, "but I am afraid I can't make it.  I'll
try--I've been pretty weak since a lion mauled me and the guards
beat me up, and too, I haven't eaten since yesterday."

Tarzan thought a moment. "You've got to go with me," he said at
last. "I can't leave you here. The only chance you have of escape
is through me and I can't go with you now until we have found the
girl."

"I want to go with you," replied Smith-Oldwick. "I'm not much good
now but at that two of us may be better than one."

"All right," said Tarzan, "come on," and before the Englishman
realized what the other contemplated Tarzan had picked him up
and thrown him across his shoulder. "Now, hang on," whispered the
ape-man, and with a short run he clambered apelike up the front of the
low arcade. So quickly and easily was it done that the Englishman
scarcely had time to realize what was happening before he was
deposited safely upon the roof.

"There," remarked Tarzan. "Now, lead me to the place you speak of."

Smith-Oldwick had no difficulty in locating the trap in the roof
through which he had escaped. Removing the cover the ape-man bent
low, listening and sniffing. "Come," he said after a moment's
investigation and lowered himself to the floor beneath. Smith-Oldwick
followed him, and together the two crept through the darkness toward
the door in the back wall of the niche in which the Englishman
had been hidden by the girl. They found the door ajar and opening
it Tarzan saw a streak of light showing through the hangings that
separated it from the alcove.

Placing his eye close to the aperture he saw the girl and the young
man of which the Englishman had spoken seated on opposite sides of
a low table upon which food was spread.  Serving them was a giant
Negro and it was he whom the ape-man watched most closely. Familiar
with the tribal idiosyncrasies of a great number of African tribes
over a considerable proportion of the Dark Continent, the Tarmangani
at last felt reasonably assured that he knew from what part of
Africa this slave had come, and the dialect of his people. There
was, however, the chance that the fellow had been captured in
childhood and that through long years of non-use his native language
had become lost to him, but then there always had been an element
of chance connected with nearly every event of Tarzan's life, so he
waited patiently until in the performance of his duties the black
man approached a little table which stood near the niche in which
Tarzan and the Englishman hid.

As the slave bent over some dish which stood upon the table his
ear was not far from the aperture through which Tarzan looked.
Apparently from a solid wall, for the Negro had no knowledge of
the existence of the niche, came to him in the tongue of his own
people, the whispered words: "If you would return to the land of
the Wamabo say nothing, but do as I bid you."

The black rolled terrified eyes toward the hangings at his side.
The ape-man could see him tremble and for a moment was fearful that
in his terror he would betray them. "Fear not," he whispered, "we
are your friends."

At last the Negro spoke in a low whisper, scarcely audible even to
the keen ears of the ape-man. "What," he asked, "can poor Otobu do
for the god who speaks to him out of the solid wall?"

"This," replied Tarzan. "Two of us are coming into this room. Help
us prevent this man and woman from escaping or raising an outcry
that will bring others to their aid."

"I will help you," replied the Negro, "to keep them within this
room, but do not fear that their outcries will bring others.  These
walls are built so that no sound may pass through, and even if it
did what difference would it make in this village which is constantly
filled with the screams of its mad people.  Do not fear their cries.
No one will notice them. I go to do your bidding."

Tarzan saw the black cross the room to the table upon which he
placed another dish of food before the feasters. Then he stepped
to a place behind the man and as he did so raised his eyes to the
point in the wall from which the ape-man's voice had come to him,
as much as to say, "Master, I am ready."

Without more delay Tarzan threw aside the hangings and stepped
into the room. As he did so the young man rose from the table to be
instantly seized from behind by the black slave.  The girl, whose
back was toward the ape-man and his companion, was not at first
aware of their presence but saw only the attack of the slave upon
her lover, and with a loud scream she leaped forward to assist the
latter. Tarzan sprang to her side and laid a heavy hand upon her
arm before she could interfere with Otobu's attentions to the young
man. At first, as she turned toward the ape-man, her face reflected
only mad rage, but almost instantly this changed into the vapid
smile with which Smith-Oldwick was already familiar and her slim
fingers commenced their soft appraisement of the newcomer.

Almost immediately she discovered Smith-Oldwick but there was
neither surprise nor anger upon her countenance. Evidently the poor
mad creature knew but two principal moods, from one to the other
of which she changed with lightning-like rapidity.

"Watch her a moment," said Tarzan to the Englishman, "while I disarm
that fellow," and stepping to the side of the young man whom Otobu
was having difficulty in subduing Tarzan relieved him of his saber.
"Tell them," he said to the Negro, "if you speak their language,
that we will not harm them if they leave us alone and let us depart
in peace."

The black had been looking at Tarzan with wide eyes, evidently
not comprehending how this god could appear in so material a form,
and with the voice of a white bwana and the uniform of a warrior
of this city to which he quite evidently did not belong. But
nevertheless his first confidence in the voice that offered him
freedom was not lessened and he did as Tarzan bid him.

"They want to know what you want," said Otobu, after he had spoken
to the man and the girl.

"Tell them that we want food for one thing," said Tarzan, "and
something else that we know where to find in this room.  Take the
man's spear, Otobu; I see it leaning against the wall in the corner
of the room. And you, Lieutenant, take his saber," and then again
to Otobu, "I will watch the man while you go and bring forth that
which is beneath the couch over against this wall," and Tarzan
indicated the location of the piece of furniture.

Otobu, trained to obey, did as he was bid. The eyes of the man and
the girl followed him, and as he drew back the hangings and dragged
forth the corpse of the man Smith-Oldwick had slain, the girl's lover
voiced a loud scream and attempted to leap forward to the side of
the corpse. Tarzan, however, seized him and then the fellow turned
upon him with teeth and nails. It was with no little difficulty
that Tarzan finally subdued the man, and while Otobu was removing
the outer clothing from the corpse, Tarzan asked the black to
question the young man as to his evident excitement at the sight
of the body.

"I can tell you Bwana," replied Otobu. "This man was his father."

"What is he saying to the girl?" asked Tarzan.

"He is asking her if she knew that the body of his father was under
the couch. And she is saying that she did not know it."

Tarzan repeated the conversation to Smith-Oldwick, who smiled. "If
the chap could have seen her removing all evidence of the crime and
arranging the hangings of the couch so that the body was concealed
after she had helped me drag it across the room, he wouldn't have
very much doubt as to her knowledge of the affair. The rug you see
draped over the bench in the corner was arranged to hide the blood
stain--in some ways they are not so loony after all."

The black man had now removed the outer garments from the dead
man, and Smith-Oldwick was hastily drawing them on over his own
clothing. "And now," said Tarzan, "we will sit down and eat. One
accomplishes little on an empty stomach." As they ate the ape-man
attempted to carry on a conversation with the two natives through
Otobu. He learned that they were in the palace which had belonged
to the dead man lying upon the floor beside them. He had held an
official position of some nature, and he and his family were of
the ruling class but were not members of the court.

When Tarzan questioned them about Bertha Kircher, the young man
said that she had been taken to the king's palace; and when asked
why replied: "For the king, of course."

During the conversation both the man and the girl appeared quite
rational, even asking some questions as to the country from which
their uninvited guests had come, and evidencing much surprise when
informed that there was anything but waterless wastes beyond their
own valley.

When Otobu asked the man, at Tarzan's suggestion, if he was familiar
with the interior of the king's palace, he replied that he was;
that he was a friend of Prince Metak, one of the king's sons, and
that he often visited the palace and that Metak also came here to
his father's palace frequently. As Tarzan ate he racked his brain
for some plan whereby he might utilize the knowledge of the young
man to gain entrance to the palace, but he had arrived at nothing
which he considered feasible when there came a loud knocking upon
the door of the outer room.

For a moment no one spoke and then the young man raised his voice
and cried aloud to those without. Immediately Otobu sprang for the
fellow and attempted to smother his words by clapping a palm over
his mouth.

"What is he saying?" asked Tarzan.

"He is telling them to break down the door and rescue him and the
girl from two strangers who entered and made them prisoners. If
they enter they will kill us all."

"Tell him," said Tarzan, "to hold his peace or I will slay him."

Otobu did as he was instructed and the young maniac lapsed into
scowling silence. Tarzan crossed the alcove and entered the outer
room to note the effect of the assaults upon the door.  Smith-Oldwick
followed him a few steps, leaving Otobu to guard the two prisoners.
The ape-man saw that the door could not long withstand the heavy
blows being dealt the panels from without. "I wanted to use that
fellow in the other room," he said to Smith-Oldwick, "but I am
afraid we will have to get out of here the way we came. We can't
accomplish anything by waiting here and meeting these fellows.
From the noise out there there must be a dozen of them. Come," he
said, "you go first and I will follow."

As the two turned back from the alcove they witnessed an entirely
different scene from that upon which they had turned their backs
but a moment or two before. Stretched on the floor and apparently
lifeless lay the body of the black slave, while the two prisoners
had vanished completely.




Chapter XXIII

The Flight from Xuja


As Metak bore Bertha Kircher toward the edge of the pool, the girl
at first had no conception of the deed he contemplated but when, as
they approached the edge, he did not lessen his speed she guessed
the frightful truth. As he leaped head foremost with her into the
water, she closed her eyes and breathed a silent prayer, for she
was confident that the maniac had no other purpose than to drown
himself and her. And yet, so potent is the first law of nature that
even in the face of certain death, as she surely believed herself,
she clung tenaciously to life, and while she struggled to free
herself from the powerful clutches of the madman, she held her
breath against the final moment when the asphyxiating waters must
inevitably flood her lungs.

Through the frightful ordeal she maintained absolute control of
her senses so that, after the first plunge, she was aware that the
man was swimming with her beneath the surface. He took perhaps not
more than a dozen strokes directly toward the end wall of the pool
and then he arose; and once again she knew that her head was above
the surface. She opened her eyes to see that they were in a corridor
dimly lighted by gratings set in its roof--a winding corridor,
water filled from wall to wall.

Along this the man was swimming with easy powerful strokes, at the
same time holding her chin above the water.  For ten minutes he swam
thus without stopping and the girl heard him speak to her, though
she could not understand what he said, as he evidently immediately
realized, for, half floating, he shifted his hold upon her so that
he could touch her nose and mouth with the fingers of one hand. She
grasped what he meant and immediately took a deep breath, whereat
he dove quickly beneath the surface pulling her down with him and
again for a dozen strokes or more he swam thus wholly submerged.

When they again came to the surface, Bertha Kircher saw that they
were in a large lagoon and that the bright stars were shining high
above them, while on either hand domed and minareted buildings were
silhouetted sharply against the starlit sky. Metak swam swiftly to
the north side of the lagoon where, by means of a ladder, the two
climbed out upon the embankment. There were others in the plaza
but they paid but little if any attention to the two bedraggled
figures. As Metak walked quickly across the pavement with the girl
at his side, Bertha Kircher could only guess at the man's intentions.
She could see no way in which to escape and so she went docilely
with him, hoping against hope that some fortuitous circumstance
might eventually arise that would give her the coveted chance for
freedom and life.

Metak led her toward a building which, as she entered, she recognized
as the same to which she and Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick had been led
when they were brought into the city.  There was no man sitting
behind the carved desk now, but about the room were a dozen or more
warriors in the tunics of the house to which they were attached, in
this case white with a small lion in the form of a crest or badge
upon the breast and back of each.

As Metak entered and the men recognized him they arose, and in answer
to a query he put, they pointed to an arched doorway at the rear
of the room. Toward this Metak led the girl, and then, as though
filled with a sudden suspicion, his eyes narrowed cunningly and
turning toward the soldiery he issued an order which resulted in
their all preceding him through the small doorway and up a flight
of stairs a short distance beyond.

The stairway and the corridor above were lighted by small flares
which revealed several doors in the walls of the upper passageway.
To one of these the men led the prince. Bertha Kircher saw them
knock upon the door and heard a voice reply faintly through the
thick door to the summons. The effect upon those about her was
electrical. Instantly excitement reigned, and in response to orders
from the king's son the soldiers commenced to beat heavily upon the
door, to throw their bodies against it and to attempt to hew away
the panels with their sabers. The girl wondered at the cause of
the evident excitement of her captors.

She saw the door giving to each renewed assault, but what she did
not see just before it crashed inward was the figures of the two
men who alone, in all the world, might have saved her, pass between
the heavy hangings in an adjoining alcove and disappear into a dark
corridor.

As the door gave and the warriors rushed into the apartment followed
by the prince, the latter became immediately filled with baffled
rage, for the rooms were deserted except for the dead body of the
owner of the palace, and the still form of the black slave, Otobu,
where they lay stretched upon the floor of the alcove.

The prince rushed to the windows and looked out, but as the suite
overlooked the barred den of lions from which, the prince thought,
there could be no escape, his puzzlement was only increased. Though
he searched about the room for some clue to the whereabouts of its
former occupants he did not discover the niche behind the hangings.
With the fickleness of insanity he quickly tired of the search,
and, turning to the soldiers who had accompanied him from the floor
below, dismissed them.

After setting up the broken door as best they could, the men left
the apartment and when they were again alone Metak turned toward
the girl. As he approached her, his face distorted by a hideous
leer, his features worked rapidly in spasmodic twitches. The girl,
who was standing at the entrance of the alcove, shrank back, her
horror reflected in her face. Step by step she backed across the
room, while the crouching maniac crept stealthily after her with
claw-like fingers poised in anticipation of the moment they should
leap forth and seize her.

As she passed the body of the Negro, her foot touched some obstacle
at her side, and glancing down she saw the spear with which Otobu
had been supposed to hold the prisoners. Instantly she leaned forward
and snatched it from the floor with its sharp point directed at
the body of the madman. The effect upon Metak was electrical. From
stealthy silence he broke into harsh peals of laughter, and drawing
his saber danced to and fro before the girl, but whichever way he
went the point of the spear still threatened him.

Gradually the girl noticed a change in the tone of the creature's
screams that was also reflected in the changing expression upon his
hideous countenance. His hysterical laughter was slowly changing
into cries of rage while the silly leer upon his face was supplanted
by a ferocious scowl and up-curled lips, which revealed the sharpened
fangs beneath.

He now ran rapidly in almost to the spear's point, only to jump
away, run a few steps to one side and again attempt to make an
entrance, the while he slashed and hewed at the spear with such
violence that it was with difficulty the girl maintained her guard,
and all the time was forced to give ground step by step. She had
reached the point where she was standing squarely against the couch
at the side of the room when, with an incredibly swift movement,
Metak stooped and grasping a low stool hurled it directly at her
head.

She raised the spear to fend off the heavy missile, but she was
not entirely successful, and the impact of the blow carried her
backward upon the couch, and instantly Metak was upon her.

Tarzan and Smith-Oldwick gave little thought as to what had become
of the other two occupants of the room. They were gone, and so far
as these two were concerned they might never return. Tarzan's one
desire was to reach the street again, where, now that both of them
were in some sort of disguise, they should be able to proceed with
comparative safety to the palace and continue their search for the
girl.

Smith-Oldwick preceded Tarzan along the corridor and as they reached
the ladder he climbed aloft to remove the trap.  He worked for a
moment and then, turning, addressed Tarzan.

"Did we replace the cover on this trap when we came down?  I don't
recall that we did."

"No," said Tarzan, "it was left open."

"So I thought," said Smith-Oldwick, "but it's closed now and locked.
I cannot move it. Possibly you can," and he descended the ladder.

Even Tarzan's immense strength, however, had no effect other than
to break one of the rungs of the ladder against which he was pushing,
nearly precipitating him to the floor below. After the rung broke
he rested for a moment before renewing his efforts, and as he stood
with his head near the cover of the trap, he distinctly heard voices
on the roof above him.

Dropping down to Oldwick's side he told him what he had heard. "We
had better find some other way out," he said, and the two started
to retrace their steps toward the alcove. Tarzan was again in the
lead, and as he opened the door in the back of the niche, he was
suddenly startled to hear, in tones of terror and in a woman's
voice, the words: "O God, be merciful" from just beyond the hangings.

Here was no time for cautious investigation and, not even waiting
to find the aperture and part the hangings, but with one sweep of
a brawny hand dragging them from their support, the ape-man leaped
from the niche into the alcove.

At the sound of his entry the maniac looked up, and as he saw at
first only a man in the uniform of his father's soldiers, he shrieked
forth an angry order, but at the second glance, which revealed the
face of the newcomer, the madman leaped from the prostrate form
of his victim and, apparently forgetful of the saber which he had
dropped upon the floor beside the couch as he leaped to grapple
with the girl, closed with bare hands upon his antagonist, his
sharp-filed teeth searching for the other's throat.

Metak, the son of Herog, was no weakling. Powerful by nature and
rendered still more so in the throes of one of his maniacal fits
of fury he was no mean antagonist, even for the mighty ape-man,
and to this a distinct advantage for him was added by the fact that
almost at the outset of their battle Tarzan, in stepping backward,
struck his heel against the corpse of the man whom Smith-Oldwick
had killed, and fell heavily backward to the floor with Metak upon
his breast.

With the quickness of a cat the maniac made an attempt to fasten
his teeth in Tarzan's jugular, but a quick movement of the latter
resulted in his finding a hold only upon the Tarmangani's shoulder.
Here he clung while his fingers sought Tarzan's throat, and it was
then that the ape-man, realizing the possibility of defeat, called
to Smith-Oldwick to take the girl and seek to escape.

The Englishman looked questioningly at Bertha Kircher, who had now
risen from the couch, shaking and trembling.  She saw the question
in his eyes and with an effort she drew herself to her full height.
"No," she cried, "if he dies here I shall die with him. Go if you
wish to. You can do nothing here, but I--I cannot go."

Tarzan had now regained his feet, but the maniac still clung to
him tenaciously. The girl turned suddenly to Smith-Oldwick.  "Your
pistol!" she cried. "Why don't you shoot him?"

The man drew the weapon from his pocket and approached the two
antagonists, but by this time they were moving so rapidly that there
was no opportunity for shooting one without the danger of hitting
the other. At the same time Bertha Kircher circled about them with
the prince's saber, but neither could she find an opening. Again
and again the two men fell to the floor, until presently Tarzan
found a hold upon the other's throat, against which contingency
Metak had been constantly battling, and slowly, as the giant fingers
closed, the other's mad eyes protruded from his livid face, his jaws
gaped and released their hold upon Tarzan's shoulder, and then in
a sudden excess of disgust and rage the ape-man lifted the body
of the prince high above his head and with all the strength of his
great arms hurled it across the room and through the window where
it fell with a sickening thud into the pit of lions beneath.

As Tarzan turned again toward his companions, the girl was standing
with the saber still in her hand and an expression upon her face
that he never had seen there before. Her eyes were wide and misty
with unshed tears, while her sensitive lips trembled as though she
were upon the point of giving way to some pent emotion which her
rapidly rising and falling bosom plainly indicated she was fighting
to control.

"If we are going to get out of here," said the ape-man, "we can't
lose any time. We are together at last and nothing can be gained by
delay. The question now is the safest way. The couple who escaped
us evidently departed through the passageway to the roof and secured
the trap against us so that we are cut off in that direction. What
chance have we below?  You came that way," and he turned toward
the girl.

"At the foot of the stairs," she said, "is a room full of armed
men. I doubt if we could pass that way."

It was then that Otobu raised himself to a sitting posture.  "So
you are not dead after all," exclaimed the ape-man.  "Come, how
badly are you hurt?"

The Negro rose gingerly to his feet, moved his arms and legs and
felt of his head.

"Otobu does not seem to be hurt at all, Bwana," he replied, "only
for a great ache in his head."

"Good," said the ape-man. "You want to return to the Wamabo country?"

"Yes, Bwana."

"Then lead us from the city by the safest way."

"There is no safe way," replied the black, "and even if we reach
the gates we shall have to fight. I can lead you from this building
to a side street with little danger of meeting anyone on the way.
Beyond that we must take our chance of discovery. You are all
dressed as are the people of this wicked city so perhaps we may
pass unnoticed, but at the gate it will be a different matter, for
none is permitted to leave the city at night."

"Very well," replied the ape-man, "let us be on our way."

Otobu led them through the broken door of the outer room, and part
way down the corridor he turned into another apartment at the right.
This they crossed to a passageway beyond, and, finally, traversing
several rooms and corridors, he led them down a flight of steps
to a door which opened directly upon a side street in rear of the
palace.

Two men, a woman, and a black slave were not so extraordinary
a sight upon the streets of the city as to arouse comment.  When
passing beneath the flares the three Europeans were careful to
choose a moment when no chance pedestrian might happen to get a view
of their features, but in the shadow of the arcades there seemed
little danger of detection. They had covered a good portion of the
distance to the gate without mishap when there came to their ears
from the central portion of the city sounds of a great commotion.

"What does that mean?" Tarzan asked of Otobu, who was now trembling
violently.

"Master," he replied, "they have discovered that which has happened
in the palace of Veza, mayor of the city. His son and the girl
escaped and summoned soldiers who have now doubtless discovered
the body of Veza."

"I wonder," said Tarzan, "if they have discovered the party I threw
through the window."

Bertha Kircher, who understood enough of the dialect to follow their
conversation, asked Tarzan if he knew that the man he had thrown
from the window was the king's son. The ape-man laughed. "No," he
said, "I did not. That rather complicates matters--at least if they
have found him."

Suddenly there broke above the turmoil behind them the clear strains
of a bugle. Otobu increased his pace. "Hurry, Master," he cried,
"it is worse than I had thought."

"What do you mean?" asked Tarzan.

"For some reason the king's guard and the king's lions are being
called out. I fear, O Bwana, that we cannot escape them.  But why
they should be called out for us I do not know."

But if Otobu did not know, Tarzan at least guessed that they had
found the body of the king's son. Once again the notes of the bugle
rose high and clear upon the night air. "Calling more lions?" asked
Tarzan.

"No, Master," replied Otobu. "It is the parrots they are calling."

They moved on rapidly in silence for a few minutes when their
attention was attracted by the flapping of the wings of a bird
above them. They looked up to discover a parrot circling about over
their heads.

"Here are the parrots, Otobu," said Tarzan with a grin.  "Do they
expect to kill us with parrots?"

The Negro moaned as the bird darted suddenly ahead of them toward
the city wall. "Now indeed are we lost, Master," cried the black.
"The bird that found us has flown to the gate to warn the guard."

"Come, Otobu, what are you talking about?" exclaimed Tarzan irritably.
"Have you lived among these lunatics so long that you are yourself
mad?"

"No, Master," replied Otobu. "I am not mad. You do not know them.
These terrible birds are like human beings without hearts or souls.
They speak the language of the people of this city of Xuja. They
are demons, Master, and when in sufficient numbers they might even
attack and kill us."

"How far are we from the gate?" asked Tarzan.

"We are not very far," replied the Negro. "Beyond this next turn
we will see it a few paces ahead of us. But the bird has reached
it before us and by now they are summoning the guard," the truth
of which statement was almost immediately indicated by sounds of
many voices raised evidently in commands just ahead of them, while
from behind came increased evidence of approaching pursuit--loud
screams and the roars of lions.

A few steps ahead a narrow alley opened from the east into the
thoroughfare they were following and as they approached it there
emerged from its dark shadows the figure of a mighty lion. Otobu
halted in his tracks and shrank back against Tarzan. "Look, Master,"
he whimpered, "a great black lion of the forest!"

Tarzan drew the saber which still hung at his side. "We cannot go
back," he said. "Lions, parrots, or men, it must be all the same,"
and he moved steadily forward in the direction of the gate. What
wind was stirring in the city street moved from Tarzan toward the
lion and when the ape-man had approached to within a few yards
of the beast, who had stood silently eyeing them up to this time,
instead of the expected roar, a whine broke from the beast's throat.
The ape-man was conscious of a very decided feeling of relief. "It's
Numa of the pit," he called back to his companions, and to Otobu,
"Do not fear, this lion will not harm us."

Numa moved forward to the ape-man's side and then turning, paced
beside him along the narrow street. At the next turn they came in
sight of the gate, where, beneath several flares, they saw a group
of at least twenty warriors prepared to seize them, while from the
opposite direction the roars of the pursuing lions sounded close
upon them, mingling with the screams of numerous parrots which now
circled about their heads. Tarzan halted and turned to the young
aviator. "How many rounds of ammunition have you left?" he asked.

"I have seven in the pistol," replied Smith-Oldwick, "and perhaps
a dozen more cartridges in my blouse pocket."

"I'm going to rush them," said Tarzan. "Otobu, you stay at the side
of the woman. Oldwick, you and I will go ahead, you upon my left.
I think we need not try to tell Numa what to do," for even then
the great lion was baring his fangs and growling ferociously at the
guardsmen, who appeared uneasy in the face of this creature which,
above all others, they feared.

"As we advance, Oldwick," said the ape-man, "fire one shot.  It
may frighten them, and after that fire only when necessary.  All
ready? Let's go!" and he moved forward toward the gate.  At the
same time, Smith-Oldwick discharged his weapon and a yellow-coated
warrior screamed and crumpled forward upon his face. For a minute
the others showed symptoms of panic but one, who seemed to be an
officer, rallied them. "Now," said Tarzan, "all together!" and he
started at a run for the gate. Simultaneously the lion, evidently
scenting the purpose of the Tarmangani, broke into a full charge
toward the guard.

Shaken by the report of the unfamiliar weapon, the ranks of the
guardsmen broke before the furious assault of the great beast.
The officer screamed forth a volley of commands in a mad fury of
uncontrolled rage but the guardsmen, obeying the first law of nature
as well as actuated by their inherent fear of the black denizen of
the forest scattered to right and left to elude the monster. With
ferocious growls Numa wheeled to the right, and with raking talons
struck right and left among a little handful of terrified guardsmen
who were endeavoring to elude him, and then Tarzan and Smith-Oldwick
closed with the others.

For a moment their most formidable antagonist was the officer in
command. He wielded his curved saber as only an adept might as he
faced Tarzan, to whom the similar weapon in his own hand was most
unfamiliar. Smith-Oldwick could not fire for fear of hitting the
ape-man when suddenly to his dismay he saw Tarzan's weapon fly from
his grasp as the Xujan warrior neatly disarmed his opponent. With
a scream the fellow raised his saber for the final cut that would
terminate the earthly career of Tarzan of the Apes when, to the
astonishment of both the ape-man and Smith-Oldwick, the fellow
stiffened rigidly, his weapon dropped from the nerveless fingers
of his upraised hand, his mad eyes rolled upward and foam flecked
his bared lip. Gasping as though in the throes of strangulation
the fellow pitched forward at Tarzan's feet.

Tarzan stooped and picked up the dead man's weapon, a smile upon
his face as he turned and glanced toward the young Englishman.

"The fellow is an epileptic," said Smith-Oldwick. "I suppose
many of them are. Their nervous condition is not without its good
points--a normal man would have gotten you."

The other guardsmen seemed utterly demoralized at the loss of their
leader. They were huddled upon the opposite side of the street at
the left of the gate, screaming at the tops of their voices and
looking in the direction from which sounds of reinforcements were
coming, as though urging on the men and lions that were already too
close for the comfort of the fugitives. Six guardsmen still stood
with their backs against the gate, their weapons flashing in the
light of the flares and their parchment-like faces distorted in
horrid grimaces of rage and terror.

Numa had pursued two fleeing warriors down the street which paralleled
the wall for a short distance at this point.  The ape-man turned to
Smith-Oldwick. "You will have to use your pistol now," he said, "and
we must get by these fellows at once;" and as the young Englishman
fired, Tarzan rushed in to close quarters as though he had not
already discovered that with the saber he was no match for these
trained swordsmen. Two men fell to Smith-Oldwick's first two shots
and then he missed, while the four remaining divided, two leaping
for the aviator and two for Tarzan.

The ape-man rushed in in an effort to close with one of his
antagonists where the other's saber would be comparatively useless.
Smith-Oldwick dropped one of his assailants with a bullet through
the chest and pulled his trigger on the second, only to have the
hammer fall futilely upon an empty chamber.  The cartridges in his
weapon were exhausted and the warrior with his razor-edged, gleaming
saber was upon him.

Tarzan raised his own weapon but once and that to divert a vicious
cut for his head. Then he was upon one of his assailants and
before the fellow could regain his equilibrium and leap back after
delivering his cut, the ape-man had seized him by the neck and
crotch. Tarzan's other antagonist was edging around to one side
where he might use his weapon, and as he raised the blade to strike
at the back of the Tarmangani's neck, the latter swung the body of
his comrade upward so that it received the full force of the blow.
The blade sank deep into the body of the warrior, eliciting a single
frightful scream, and then Tarzan hurled the dying man in the face
of his final adversary.

Smith-Oldwick, hard pressed and now utterly defenseless, had given
up all hope in the instant that he realized his weapon was empty,
when, from his left, a living bolt of black-maned ferocity shot
past him to the breast of his opponent.  Down went the Xujan, his
face bitten away by one snap of the powerful jaws of Numa of the
pit.

In the few seconds that had been required for the consummation
of these rapidly ensuing events, Otobu had dragged Bertha Kircher
to the gate which he had unbarred and thrown open, and with the
vanquishing of the last of the active guardsmen, the party passed
out of the maniac city of Xuja into the outer darkness beyond. At
the same moment a half dozen lions rounded the last turn in the
road leading back toward the plaza, and at sight of them Numa of
the pit wheeled and charged. For a moment the lions of the city
stood their ground, but only for a moment, and then before the
black beast was upon them, they turned and fled, while Tarzan and
his party moved rapidly toward the blackness of the forest beyond
the garden.

"Will they follow us out of the city?" Tarzan asked Otobu.

"Not at night," replied the black. "I have been a slave here for
five years but never have I known these people to leave the city
by night. If they go beyond the forest in the daytime they usually
wait until the dawn of another day before they return, as they fear
to pass through the country of the black lions after dark. No, I
think, Master, that they will not follow us tonight, but tomorrow
they will come, and, O Bwana, then will they surely get us, or
those that are left of us, for at least one among us must be the
toll of the black lions as we pass through their forest."

As they crossed the garden, Smith-Oldwick refilled the magazine
of his pistol and inserted a cartridge in the chamber.  The girl
moved silently at Tarzan's left, between him and the aviator. Suddenly
the ape-man stopped and turned toward the city, his mighty frame,
clothed in the yellow tunic of Herog's soldiery, plainly visible
to the others beneath the light of the stars. They saw him raise
his head and they heard break from his lips the plaintive note of
a lion calling to his fellows. Smith-Oldwick felt a distinct shudder
pass through his frame, while Otobu, rolling the whites of his eyes
in terrified surprise, sank tremblingly to his knees. But the girl
thrilled and she felt her heart beat in a strange exultation, and
then she drew nearer to the beast-man until her shoulder touched his
arm. The act was involuntary and for a moment she scarce realized
what she had done, and then she stepped silently back, thankful
that the light of the stars was not sufficient to reveal to the
eyes of her companions the flush which she felt mantling her cheek.
Yet she was not ashamed of the impulse that had prompted her, but
rather of the act itself which she knew, had Tarzan noticed it,
would have been repulsive to him.

From the open gate of the city of maniacs came the answering cry
of a lion. The little group waited where they stood until presently
they saw the majestic proportions of the black lion as he approached
them along the trail. When he had rejoined them Tarzan fastened
the fingers of one hand in the black mane and started on once more
toward the forest. Behind them, from the city, rose a bedlam of
horrid sounds, the roaring of lions mingling with the raucous voices
of the screaming parrots and the mad shrieks of the maniacs. As
they entered the Stygian darkness of the forest the girl once again
involuntarily shrank closer to the ape-man, and this time Tarzan
was aware of the contact.

Himself without fear, he yet instinctively appreciated how terrified
the girl must be. Actuated by a sudden kindly impulse he found
her hand and took it in his own and thus they continued upon their
way, groping through the blackness of the trail. Twice they were
approached by forest lions, but upon both occasions the deep growls
of Numa of the pit drove off their assailants. Several times they
were compelled to rest, for Smith-Oldwick was constantly upon the
verge of exhaustion, and toward morning Tarzan was forced to carry
him on the steep ascent from the bed of the valley.




Chapter XXIV

The Tommies


Daylight overtook them after they had entered the gorge, but, tired
as they all were with the exception of Tarzan, they realized that
they must keep on at all costs until they found a spot where they
might ascend the precipitous side of the gorge to the floor of the
plateau above. Tarzan and Otobu were both equally confident that
the Xujans would not follow them beyond the gorge, but though they
scanned every inch of the frowning cliffs upon either hand noon
came and there was still no indication of any avenue of escape
to right or left. There were places where the ape-man alone might
have negotiated the ascent but none where the others could hope
successfully to reach the plateau, nor where Tarzan, powerful and
agile as he was, could have ventured safely to carry them aloft.

For half a day the ape-man had been either carrying or supporting
Smith-Oldwick and now, to his chagrin, he saw that the girl was
faltering. He had realized well how much she had undergone and
how greatly the hardships and dangers and the fatigue of the past
weeks must have told upon her vitality. He saw how bravely she
attempted to keep up, yet how often she stumbled and staggered as
she labored through the sand and gravel of the gorge. Nor could
he help but admire her fortitude and the uncomplaining effort she
was making to push on.

The Englishman must have noticed her condition too, for some time
after noon, he stopped suddenly and sat down in the sand. "It's
no use," he said to Tarzan. "I can go no farther. Miss Kircher is
rapidly weakening. You will have to go on without me."

"No," said the girl, "we cannot do that. We have all been through
so much together and the chances of our escape are still so remote
that whatever comes, let us remain together, unless," and she looked
up at Tarzan, "you, who have done so much for us to whom you are
under no obligations, will go on without us. I for one wish that
you would. It must be as evident to you as it is to me that you
cannot save us, for though you succeeded in dragging us from the
path of our pursuers, even your great strength and endurance could
never take one of us across the desert waste which lies between
here and the nearest fertile country."

The ape-man returned her serious look with a smile. "You are
not dead," he said to her, "nor is the lieutenant, nor Otobu, nor
myself. One is either dead or alive, and until we are dead we should
plan only upon continuing to live. Because we remain here and rest
is no indication that we shall die here.  I cannot carry you both
to the country of the Wamabos, which is the nearest spot at which
we may expect to find game and water, but we shall not give up on
that account. So far we have found a way. Let us take things as
they come. Let us rest now because you and Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick
need the rest, and when you are stronger we will go on again."

"But the Xujans--?" she asked, "may they not follow us here?"

"Yes," he said, "they probably will. But we need not be concerned
with them until they come."

"I wish," said the girl, "that I possessed your philosophy but I
am afraid it is beyond me."

"You were not born and reared in the jungle by wild beasts and
among wild beasts, or you would possess, as I do, the fatalism of
the jungle."

And so they moved to the side of the gorge beneath the shade of an
overhanging rock and lay down in the hot sand to rest. Numa wandered
restlessly to and fro and finally, after sprawling for a moment
close beside the ape-man, rose and moved off up the gorge to be
lost to view a moment later beyond the nearest turn.

For an hour the little party rested and then Tarzan suddenly
rose and, motioning the others to silence, listened. For a minute
he stood motionless, his keen ears acutely receptive to sounds so
faint and distant that none of the other three could detect the
slightest break in the utter and deathlike quiet of the gorge.
Finally the ape-man relaxed and turned toward them.  "What is it?"
asked the girl.

"They are coming," he replied. "They are yet some distance away,
though not far, for the sandaled feet of the men and the pads of
the lions make little noise upon the soft sands."

"What shall we do--try to go on?" asked Smith-Oldwick.  "I believe
I could make a go of it now for a short way. I am much rested. How
about you Miss Kircher?"

"Oh, yes," she said, "I am much stronger. Yes, surely I can go on."

Tarzan knew that neither of them quite spoke the truth, that people
do not recover so quickly from utter exhaustion, but he saw no
other way and there was always the hope that just beyond the next
turn would be a way out of the gorge.

"You help the lieutenant, Otobu," he said, turning to the black,
"and I will carry Miss Kircher," and though the girl objected,
saying that he must not waste his strength, he lifted her lightly
in his arms and moved off up the canyon, followed by Otobu and
the Englishman. They had gone no great distance when the others of
the party became aware of the sounds of pursuit, for now the lions
were whining as though the fresh scent spoor of their quarry had
reached their nostrils.

"I wish that your Numa would return," said the girl.

"Yes," said Tarzan, "but we shall have to do the best we can
without him. I should like to find some place where we can barricade
ourselves against attack from all sides. Possibly then we might
hold them off. Smith-Oldwick is a good shot and if there are not
too many men he might be able to dispose of them provided they can
only come at him one at a time. The lions don't bother me so much.
Sometimes they are stupid animals, and I am sure that these that
pursue us, and who are so dependent upon the masters that have
raised and trained them, will be easily handled after the warriors
are disposed of."

"You think there is some hope, then?" she asked.

"We are still alive," was his only answer.

"There," he said presently, "I thought I recalled this very spot."
He pointed toward a fragment that had evidently fallen from the
summit of the cliff and which now lay imbedded in the sand a few
feet from the base. It was a jagged fragment of rock which rose some
ten feet above the surface of the sand, leaving a narrow aperture
between it and the cliff behind. Toward this they directed their
steps and when finally they reached their goal they found a space
about two feet wide and ten feet long between the rock and the
cliff. To be sure it was open at both ends but at least they could
not be attacked upon all sides at once.

They had scarcely concealed themselves before Tarzan's quick ears
caught a sound upon the face of the cliff above them, and looking
up he saw a diminutive monkey perched upon a slight projection--an
ugly-faced little monkey who looked down upon them for a moment and
then scampered away toward the south in the direction from which
their pursuers were coming. Otobu had seen the monkey too. "He will
tell the parrots," said the black, "and the parrots will tell the
madmen."

"It is all the same," replied Tarzan; "the lions would have found
us here. We could not hope to hide from them."

He placed Smith-Oldwick, with his pistol, at the north opening of
their haven and told Otobu to stand with his spear at the Englishman's
shoulder, while he himself prepared to guard the southern approach.
Between them he had the girl lie down in the sand. "You will be
safe there in the event that they use their spears," he said.

The minutes that dragged by seemed veritable eternities to Bertha
Kircher and then at last, and almost with relief, she knew that the
pursuers were upon them. She heard the angry roaring of the lions
and the cries of the madmen. For several minutes the men seemed to
be investigating the stronghold which their quarry had discovered.
She could hear them both to the north and south and then from
where she lay she saw a lion charging for the ape-man before her.
She saw the giant arm swing back with the curved saber and she
saw it fall with terrific velocity and meet the lion as he rose to
grapple with the man, cleaving his skull as cleanly as a butcher
opens up a sheep.

Then she heard footsteps running rapidly toward Smith-Oldwick and,
as his pistol spoke, there was a scream and the sound of a falling
body. Evidently disheartened by the failure of their first attempt
the assaulters drew off, but only for a short time. Again they came,
this time a man opposing Tarzan and a lion seeking to overcome
Smith-Oldwick. Tarzan had cautioned the young Englishman not
to waste his cartridges upon the lions and it was Otobu with the
Xujan spear who met the beast, which was not subdued until both
he and Smith-Oldwick had been mauled, and the latter had succeeded
in running the point of the saber the girl had carried, into the
beast's heart. The man who opposed Tarzan inadvertently came too
close in an attempt to cut at the ape-man's head, with the result
that an instant later his corpse lay with the neck broken upon the
body of the lion.

Once again the enemy withdrew, but again only for a short time,
and now they came in full force, the lions and the men, possibly
a half dozen of each, the men casting their spears and the lions
waiting just behind, evidently for the signal to charge.

"Is this the end?" asked the girl.

"No," cried the ape-man, "for we still live!"

The words had scarcely passed his lips when the remaining warriors,
rushing in, cast their spears simultaneously from both sides. In
attempting to shield the girl, Tarzan received one of the shafts
in the shoulder, and so heavily had the weapon been hurled that it
bore him backward to the ground.  Smith-Oldwick fired his pistol
twice when he too was struck down, the weapon entering his right
leg midway between hip and knee. Only Otobu remained to face the
enemy, for the Englishman, already weak from his wounds and from
the latest mauling he had received at the claws of the lion, had
lost consciousness as he sank to the ground with this new hurt.

As he fell his pistol dropped from his fingers, and the girl, seeing,
snatched it up. As Tarzan struggled to rise, one of the warriors
leaped full upon his breast and bore him back as, with fiendish
shrieks, he raised the point of his saber above the other's heart.
Before he could drive it home the girl leveled Smith-Oldwick's
pistol and fired point-blank at the fiend's face.

Simultaneously there broke upon the astonished ears of both attackers
and attacked a volley of shots from the gorge. With the sweetness
of the voice of an angel from heaven the Europeans heard the
sharp-barked commands of an English noncom. Even above the roars
of the lions and the screams of the maniacs, those beloved tones
reached the ears of Tarzan and the girl at the very moment that
even the ape-man had given up the last vestige of hope.

Rolling the body of the warrior to one side Tarzan struggled to
his feet, the spear still protruding from his shoulder.  The girl
rose too, and as Tarzan wrenched the weapon from his flesh and stepped
out from behind the concealment of their refuge, she followed at
his side. The skirmish that had resulted in their rescue was soon
over. Most of the lions escaped but all of the pursuing Xujans
had been slain. As Tarzan and the girl came into full view of the
group, a British Tommy leveled his rifle at the ape-man. Seeing the
fellow's actions and realizing instantly the natural error that
Tarzan's yellow tunic had occasioned the girl sprang between him
and the soldier. "Don't shoot," she cried to the latter, "we are
both friends."

"Hold up your hands, you, then," he commanded Tarzan.  "I ain't
taking no chances with any duffer with a yellow shirt."

At this juncture the British sergeant who had been in command of
the advance guard approached and when Tarzan and the girl spoke
to him in English, explaining their disguises, he accepted their
word, since they were evidently not of the same race as the creatures
which lay dead about them. Ten minutes later the main body of the
expedition came into view.  Smith-Oldwick's wounds were dressed,
as well as were those of the ape-man, and in half an hour they were
on their way to the camp of their rescuers.

That night it was arranged that the following day Smith-Oldwick and
Bertha Kircher should be transported to British headquarters near
the coast by aeroplane, the two planes attached to the expeditionary
force being requisitioned for the purpose. Tarzan and Otobu declined
the offers of the British captain to accompany his force overland
on the return march as Tarzan explained that his country lay to
the west, as did Otobu's, and that they would travel together as
far as the country of the Wamabos.

"You are not going back with us, then?" asked the girl.

"No," replied the ape-man. "My home is upon the west coast. I will
continue my journey in that direction."

She cast appealing eyes toward him. "You will go back into that
terrible jungle?" she asked. "We shall never see you again?"

He looked at her a moment in silence. "Never," he said, and without
another word turned and walked away.

In the morning Colonel Capell came from the base camp in one of the
planes that was to carry Smith-Oldwick and the girl to the east.
Tarzan was standing some distance away as the ship landed and
the officer descended to the ground. He saw the colonel greet his
junior in command of the advance detachment, and then he saw him
turn toward Bertha Kircher who was standing a few paces behind the
captain. Tarzan wondered how the German spy felt in this situation,
especially when she must know that there was one there who knew her
real status. He saw Colonel Capell walk toward her with outstretched
hands and smiling face and, although he could not hear the words of
his greeting, he saw that it was friendly and cordial to a degree.

Tarzan turned away scowling, and if any had been close by they
might have heard a low growl rumble from his chest. He knew that
his country was at war with Germany and that not only his duty to
the land of his fathers, but also his personal grievance against
the enemy people and his hatred of them, demanded that he expose
the girl's perfidy, and yet he hesitated, and because he hesitated
he growled--not at the German spy but at himself for his weakness.

He did not see her again before she entered a plane and was borne
away toward the east. He bid farewell to Smith-Oldwick and received
again the oft-repeated thanks of the young Englishman. And then
he saw him too borne aloft in the high circling plane and watched
until the ship became a speck far above the eastern horizon to
disappear at last high in air.

The Tommies, their packs and accouterments slung, were waiting the
summons to continue their return march. Colonel Capell had, through
a desire to personally observe the stretch of country between the
camp of the advance detachment and the base, decided to march back
his troops. Now that all was in readiness for departure he turned to
Tarzan. "I wish you would come back with us, Greystoke," he said,
"and if my appeal carries no inducement possibly that of Smith-Oldwick
and the young lady who just left us may. They asked me to urge
you to return to civilization."

"No;" said Tarzan, "I shall go my own way. Miss Kircher and
Lieutenant Smith-Oldwick were only prompted by a sense of gratitude
in considering my welfare."

"Miss Kircher?" exclaimed Capell and then he laughed, "You know
her then as Bertha Kircher, the German spy?"

Tarzan looked at the other a moment in silence. It was beyond him
to conceive that a British officer should thus laconically speak
of an enemy spy whom he had had within his power and permitted to
escape. "Yes," he replied, "I knew that she was Bertha Kircher,
the German spy?"

"Is that all you knew?" asked Capell.

"That is all," said the ape-man.

"She is the Honorable Patricia Canby," said Capell, "one of the
most valuable members of the British Intelligence Service attached
to the East African forces. Her father and I served in India together
and I have known her ever since she was born.

"Why, here's a packet of papers she took from a German officer and
has been carrying it through all her vicissitudes--single-minded
in the performance of her duty. Look! I haven't yet had time to
examine them but as you see here is a military sketch map, a bundle
of reports, and the diary of one Hauptmann Fritz Schneider."

"The diary of Hauptmann Fritz Schneider!" repeated Tarzan in a
constrained voice. "May I see it, Capell? He is the man who murdered
Lady Greystoke."

The Englishman handed the little volume over to the other without
a word. Tarzan ran through the pages quickly looking for a certain
date--the date that the horror had been committed--and when he found
it he read rapidly. Suddenly a gasp of incredulity burst from his
lips. Capell looked at him questioningly.

"God!" exclaimed the ape-man. "Can this be true? Listen!" and he
read an excerpt from the closely written page:

"'Played a little joke on the English pig. When he comes home he
will find the burned body of his wife in her boudoir--but he will
only think it is his wife. Had von Goss substitute the body of a
dead Negress and char it after putting Lady Greystoke's rings on
it--Lady G will be of more value to the High Command alive than
dead.'"

"She lives!" cried Tarzan.

"Thank God!" exclaimed Capell. "And now?"

"I will return with you, of course. How terribly I have wronged
Miss Canby, but how could I know? I even told Smith-Oldwick, who
loves her, that she was a German spy.

"Not only must I return to find my wife but I must right this
wrong."

"Don't worry about that," said Capell, "she must have convinced him
that she is no enemy spy, for just before they left this morning
he told me she had promised to marry him."





  Note: I have made the following changes to the text:

  PAGE  LINE  ORIGINAL          CHANGED TO
    25    10  noislessly        noiselessly
    40    34  hole              bole
    41    45  later             latter
    53    43  but               "but
    66    19  half-smiled       half-smile
    69    45  to many           too many
    75    16  fine              find
    81     3  forth             fourth
    86    14  hoplessly         hopelessly
    86    42  interferred       interfered
    93    15  born              borne
   101    40  Englishman        Englishmen
   108    16  divertisements    divertissements
   110    29  asid              said
   127    14  apppreciate       appreciate
   128    45  fuseluge          fuselage
   138    25  as the            at the
   142    34  girls'            girl's
   146    44  sourroundings,    surroundings,
   148    30  spirit on         spirit of
   149    33  upon              upon.
   153     3  immediately       immediate
   153    39  nothwithstanding  notwithstanding
   159    43  "The              The
   163    45  known             know
   171     8  one the           on the
   172     8  sandled           sandaled
   175     2  junlgle           jungle
   181    46  swifty            swiftly
   189    23  not,              not.
   198    45  "Come,"           Come,"
   219     1  still             sill
   225    21  sigh or           sigh of
   227    20  occasionaly       occasionally
   228     5  gazing            grazing
   234    24  prisoners.        prisoners.
   237    11  qiuckly           quickly
   237    16  opproached        approached
   243    16  is his            in his
   244    32  second            seconds

I have also omitted the page-wide line beneath each chapter
heading.









End of Project Gutenberg's Tarzan the Untamed, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN THE UNTAMED ***

***** This file should be named 1401.txt or 1401.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/4/0/1401/

Produced by Judith Boss

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tarzan the Terrible, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tarzan the Terrible

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Posting Date: November 19, 2008 [EBook #2020]
Release Date: January, 2000
[Last updated: July 28, 2012]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN THE TERRIBLE ***




Produced by Judy Boss.









Tarzan the Terrible


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs





CHAPTER

     I  The Pithecanthropus
    II  "To the Death!"
   III  Pan-at-lee
    IV  Tarzan-jad-guru
     V  In the Kor-ul-GRYF
    VI  The Tor-o-don
   VII  Jungle Craft
  VIII  A-lur
    IX  Blood-Stained Altars
     X  The Forbidden Garden
    XI  The Sentence of Death
   XII  The Giant Stranger
  XIII  The Masquerader
   XIV  The Temple of the Gryf
    XV  "The King Is Dead!"
   XVI  The Secret Way
  XVII  By Jad-bal-lul
 XVIII  The Lion Pit of Tu-lur
   XIX  Diana of the Jungle
    XX  Silently in the Night
   XXI  The Maniac
  XXII  A Journey on a Gryf
 XXIII  Taken Alive
  XXIV  The Messenger of Death
   XXV  Home
        Glossary





1

The Pithecanthropus

Silent as the shadows through which he moved, the great beast slunk
through the midnight jungle, his yellow-green eyes round and staring,
his sinewy tail undulating behind him, his head lowered and flattened,
and every muscle vibrant to the thrill of the hunt. The jungle moon
dappled an occasional clearing which the great cat was always careful
to avoid. Though he moved through thick verdure across a carpet of
innumerable twigs, broken branches, and leaves, his passing gave forth
no sound that might have been apprehended by dull human ears.

Apparently less cautious was the hunted thing moving even as silently
as the lion a hundred paces ahead of the tawny carnivore, for instead
of skirting the moon-splashed natural clearings it passed directly
across them, and by the tortuous record of its spoor it might indeed be
guessed that it sought these avenues of least resistance, as well it
might, since, unlike its grim stalker, it walked erect upon two
feet--it walked upon two feet and was hairless except for a black
thatch upon its head; its arms were well shaped and muscular; its hands
powerful and slender with long tapering fingers and thumbs reaching
almost to the first joint of the index fingers. Its legs too were
shapely but its feet departed from the standards of all races of men,
except possibly a few of the lowest races, in that the great toes
protruded at right angles from the foot.

Pausing momentarily in the full light of the gorgeous African moon the
creature turned an attentive ear to the rear and then, his head lifted,
his features might readily have been discerned in the moonlight. They
were strong, clean cut, and regular--features that would have attracted
attention for their masculine beauty in any of the great capitals of
the world. But was this thing a man? It would have been hard for a
watcher in the trees to have decided as the lion's prey resumed its way
across the silver tapestry that Luna had laid upon the floor of the
dismal jungle, for from beneath the loin cloth of black fur that
girdled its thighs there depended a long hairless, white tail.

In one hand the creature carried a stout club, and suspended at its
left side from a shoulder belt was a short, sheathed knife, while a
cross belt supported a pouch at its right hip. Confining these straps
to the body and also apparently supporting the loin cloth was a broad
girdle which glittered in the moonlight as though encrusted with virgin
gold, and was clasped in the center of the belly with a huge buckle of
ornate design that scintillated as with precious stones.

Closer and closer crept Numa, the lion, to his intended victim, and
that the latter was not entirely unaware of his danger was evidenced by
the increasing frequency with which he turned his ear and his sharp
black eyes in the direction of the cat upon his trail. He did not
greatly increase his speed, a long swinging walk where the open places
permitted, but he loosened the knife in its scabbard and at all times
kept his club in readiness for instant action.

Forging at last through a narrow strip of dense jungle vegetation the
man-thing broke through into an almost treeless area of considerable
extent. For an instant he hesitated, glancing quickly behind him and
then up at the security of the branches of the great trees waving
overhead, but some greater urge than fear or caution influenced his
decision apparently, for he moved off again across the little plain
leaving the safety of the trees behind him. At greater or less
intervals leafy sanctuaries dotted the grassy expanse ahead of him and
the route he took, leading from one to another, indicated that he had
not entirely cast discretion to the winds. But after the second tree
had been left behind the distance to the next was considerable, and it
was then that Numa walked from the concealing cover of the jungle and,
seeing his quarry apparently helpless before him, raised his tail
stiffly erect and charged.

Two months--two long, weary months filled with hunger, with thirst,
with hardships, with disappointment, and, greater than all, with
gnawing pain--had passed since Tarzan of the Apes learned from the
diary of the dead German captain that his wife still lived. A brief
investigation in which he was enthusiastically aided by the
Intelligence Department of the British East African Expedition revealed
the fact that an attempt had been made to keep Lady Jane in hiding in
the interior, for reasons of which only the German High Command might
be cognizant.

In charge of Lieutenant Obergatz and a detachment of native German
troops she had been sent across the border into the Congo Free State.

Starting out alone in search of her, Tarzan had succeeded in finding
the village in which she had been incarcerated only to learn that she
had escaped months before, and that the German officer had disappeared
at the same time. From there on the stories of the chiefs and the
warriors whom he quizzed, were vague and often contradictory. Even the
direction that the fugitives had taken Tarzan could only guess at by
piecing together bits of fragmentary evidence gleaned from various
sources.

Sinister conjectures were forced upon him by various observations which
he made in the village. One was incontrovertible proof that these
people were man-eaters; the other, the presence in the village of
various articles of native German uniforms and equipment. At great risk
and in the face of surly objection on the part of the chief, the
ape-man made a careful inspection of every hut in the village from
which at least a little ray of hope resulted from the fact that he
found no article that might have belonged to his wife.

Leaving the village he had made his way toward the southwest, crossing,
after the most appalling hardships, a vast waterless steppe covered for
the most part with dense thorn, coming at last into a district that had
probably never been previously entered by any white man and which was
known only in the legends of the tribes whose country bordered it. Here
were precipitous mountains, well-watered plateaus, wide plains, and
vast swampy morasses, but neither the plains, nor the plateaus, nor the
mountains were accessible to him until after weeks of arduous effort he
succeeded in finding a spot where he might cross the morasses--a
hideous stretch infested by venomous snakes and other larger dangerous
reptiles. On several occasions he glimpsed at distances or by night
what might have been titanic reptilian monsters, but as there were
hippopotami, rhinoceri, and elephants in great numbers in and about the
marsh he was never positive that the forms he saw were not of these.

When at last he stood upon firm ground after crossing the morasses he
realized why it was that for perhaps countless ages this territory had
defied the courage and hardihood of the heroic races of the outer world
that had, after innumerable reverses and unbelievable suffering
penetrated to practically every other region, from pole to pole.

From the abundance and diversity of the game it might have appeared
that every known species of bird and beast and reptile had sought here
a refuge wherein they might take their last stand against the
encroaching multitudes of men that had steadily spread themselves over
the surface of the earth, wresting the hunting grounds from the lower
orders, from the moment that the first ape shed his hair and ceased to
walk upon his knuckles.  Even the species with which Tarzan was
familiar showed here either the results of a divergent line of
evolution or an unaltered form that had been transmitted without
variation for countless ages.

Too, there were many hybrid strains, not the least interesting of which
to Tarzan was a yellow and black striped lion. Smaller than the species
with which Tarzan was familiar, but still a most formidable beast,
since it possessed in addition to sharp saber-like canines the
disposition of a devil. To Tarzan it presented evidence that tigers had
once roamed the jungles of Africa, possibly giant saber-tooths of
another epoch, and these apparently had crossed with lions with the
resultant terrors that he occasionally encountered at the present day.

The true lions of this new, Old World differed but little from those
with which he was familiar; in size and conformation they were almost
identical, but instead of shedding the leopard spots of cubhood, they
retained them through life as definitely marked as those of the leopard.

Two months of effort had revealed no slightest evidence that she he
sought had entered this beautiful yet forbidding land. His
investigation, however, of the cannibal village and his questioning of
other tribes in the neighborhood had convinced him that if Lady Jane
still lived it must be in this direction that he seek her, since by a
process of elimination he had reduced the direction of her flight to
only this possibility. How she had crossed the morass he could not
guess and yet something within seemed to urge upon him belief that she
had crossed it, and that if she still lived it was here that she must
be sought. But this unknown, untraversed wild was of vast extent; grim,
forbidding mountains blocked his way, torrents tumbling from rocky
fastnesses impeded his progress, and at every turn he was forced to
match wits and muscles with the great carnivora that he might procure
sustenance.

Time and again Tarzan and Numa stalked the same quarry and now one, now
the other bore off the prize. Seldom however did the ape-man go hungry
for the country was rich in game animals and birds and fish, in fruit
and the countless other forms of vegetable life upon which the
jungle-bred man may subsist.

Tarzan often wondered why in so rich a country he found no evidences of
man and had at last come to the conclusion that the parched,
thorn-covered steppe and the hideous morasses had formed a sufficient
barrier to protect this country effectively from the inroads of mankind.

After days of searching he had succeeded finally in discovering a pass
through the mountains and, coming down upon the opposite side, had
found himself in a country practically identical with that which he had
left. The hunting was good and at a water hole in the mouth of a canyon
where it debouched upon a tree-covered plain Bara, the deer, fell an
easy victim to the ape-man's cunning.

It was just at dusk. The voices of great four-footed hunters rose now
and again from various directions, and as the canyon afforded among its
trees no comfortable retreat the ape-man shouldered the carcass of the
deer and started downward onto the plain. At its opposite side rose
lofty trees--a great forest which suggested to his practiced eye a
mighty jungle. Toward this the ape-man bent his step, but when midway
of the plain he discovered standing alone such a tree as best suited
him for a night's abode, swung lightly to its branches and, presently,
a comfortable resting place.

Here he ate the flesh of Bara and when satisfied carried the balance of
the carcass to the opposite side of the tree where he deposited it far
above the ground in a secure place. Returning to his crotch he settled
himself for sleep and in another moment the roars of the lions and the
howlings of the lesser cats fell upon deaf ears.

The usual noises of the jungle composed rather than disturbed the
ape-man but an unusual sound, however imperceptible to the awakened ear
of civilized man, seldom failed to impinge upon the consciousness of
Tarzan, however deep his slumber, and so it was that when the moon was
high a sudden rush of feet across the grassy carpet in the vicinity of
his tree brought him to alert and ready activity. Tarzan does not
awaken as you and I with the weight of slumber still upon his eyes and
brain, for did the creatures of the wild awaken thus, their awakenings
would be few.  As his eyes snapped open, clear and bright, so, clear
and bright upon the nerve centers of his brain, were registered the
various perceptions of all his senses.

Almost beneath him, racing toward his tree was what at first glance
appeared to be an almost naked white man, yet even at the first instant
of discovery the long, white tail projecting rearward did not escape
the ape-man. Behind the fleeing figure, escaping, came Numa, the lion,
in full charge. Voiceless the prey, voiceless the killer; as two
spirits in a dead world the two moved in silent swiftness toward the
culminating tragedy of this grim race.

Even as his eyes opened and took in the scene beneath him--even in that
brief instant of perception, followed reason, judgment, and decision,
so rapidly one upon the heels of the other that almost simultaneously
the ape-man was in mid-air, for he had seen a white-skinned creature
cast in a mold similar to his own, pursued by Tarzan's hereditary
enemy. So close was the lion to the fleeing man-thing that Tarzan had
no time carefully to choose the method of his attack. As a diver leaps
from the springboard headforemost into the waters beneath, so Tarzan of
the Apes dove straight for Numa, the lion; naked in his right hand the
blade of his father that so many times before had tasted the blood of
lions.

A raking talon caught Tarzan on the side, inflicting a long, deep wound
and then the ape-man was on Numa's back and the blade was sinking again
and again into the savage side. Nor was the man-thing either longer
fleeing, or idle. He too, creature of the wild, had sensed on the
instant the truth of the miracle of his saving, and turning in his
tracks, had leaped forward with raised bludgeon to Tarzan's assistance
and Numa's undoing. A single terrific blow upon the flattened skull of
the beast laid him insensible and then as Tarzan's knife found the wild
heart a few convulsive shudders and a sudden relaxation marked the
passing of the carnivore.

Leaping to his feet the ape-man placed his foot upon the carcass of his
kill and, raising his face to Goro, the moon, voiced the savage victory
cry that had so often awakened the echoes of his native jungle.

As the hideous scream burst from the ape-man's lips the man-thing
stepped quickly back as in sudden awe, but when Tarzan returned his
hunting knife to its sheath and turned toward him the other saw in the
quiet dignity of his demeanor no cause for apprehension.

For a moment the two stood appraising each other, and then the
man-thing spoke. Tarzan realized that the creature before him was
uttering articulate sounds which expressed in speech, though in a
language with which Tarzan was unfamiliar, the thoughts of a man
possessing to a greater or less extent the same powers of reason that
he possessed. In other words, that though the creature before him had
the tail and thumbs and great toes of a monkey, it was, in all other
respects, quite evidently a man.

The blood, which was now flowing down Tarzan's side, caught the
creature's attention. From the pocket-pouch at his side he took a small
bag and approaching Tarzan indicated by signs that he wished the
ape-man to lie down that he might treat the wound, whereupon, spreading
the edges of the cut apart, he sprinkled the raw flesh with powder from
the little bag. The pain of the wound was as nothing to the exquisite
torture of the remedy but, accustomed to physical suffering, the
ape-man withstood it stoically and in a few moments not only had the
bleeding ceased but the pain as well.

In reply to the soft and far from unpleasant modulations of the other's
voice, Tarzan spoke in various tribal dialects of the interior as well
as in the language of the great apes, but it was evident that the man
understood none of these. Seeing that they could not make each other
understood, the pithecanthropus advanced toward Tarzan and placing his
left hand over his own heart laid the palm of his right hand over the
heart of the ape-man. To the latter the action appeared as a form of
friendly greeting and, being versed in the ways of uncivilized races,
he responded in kind as he realized it was doubtless intended that he
should. His action seemed to satisfy and please his new-found
acquaintance, who immediately fell to talking again and finally, with
his head tipped back, sniffed the air in the direction of the tree
above them and then suddenly pointing toward the carcass of Bara, the
deer, he touched his stomach in a sign language which even the densest
might interpret. With a wave of his hand Tarzan invited his guest to
partake of the remains of his savage repast, and the other, leaping
nimbly as a little monkey to the lower branches of the tree, made his
way quickly to the flesh, assisted always by his long, strong sinuous
tail.

The pithecanthropus ate in silence, cutting small strips from the
deer's loin with his keen knife. From his crotch in the tree Tarzan
watched his companion, noting the preponderance of human attributes
which were doubtless accentuated by the paradoxical thumbs, great toes,
and tail.

He wondered if this creature was representative of some strange race or
if, what seemed more likely, but an atavism. Either supposition would
have seemed preposterous enough did he not have before him the evidence
of the creature's existence. There he was, however, a tailed man with
distinctly arboreal hands and feet. His trappings, gold encrusted and
jewel studded, could have been wrought only by skilled artisans; but
whether they were the work of this individual or of others like him, or
of an entirely different race, Tarzan could not, of course, determine.

His meal finished, the guest wiped his fingers and lips with leaves
broken from a nearby branch, looked up at Tarzan with a pleasant smile
that revealed a row of strong white teeth, the canines of which were no
longer than Tarzan's own, spoke a few words which Tarzan judged were a
polite expression of thanks and then sought a comfortable place in the
tree for the night.

The earth was shadowed in the darkness which precedes the dawn when
Tarzan was awakened by a violent shaking of the tree in which he had
found shelter. As he opened his eyes he saw that his companion was also
astir, and glancing around quickly to apprehend the cause of the
disturbance, the ape-man was astounded at the sight which met his eyes.

The dim shadow of a colossal form reared close beside the tree and he
saw that it was the scraping of the giant body against the branches
that had awakened him. That such a tremendous creature could have
approached so closely without disturbing him filled Tarzan with both
wonderment and chagrin. In the gloom the ape-man at first conceived the
intruder to be an elephant; yet, if so, one of greater proportions than
any he had ever before seen, but as the dim outlines became less
indistinct he saw on a line with his eyes and twenty feet above the
ground the dim silhouette of a grotesquely serrated back that gave the
impression of a creature whose each and every spinal vertebra grew a
thick, heavy horn.  Only a portion of the back was visible to the
ape-man, the rest of the body being lost in the dense shadows beneath
the tree, from whence there now arose the sound of giant jaws
powerfully crunching flesh and bones. From the odors that rose to the
ape-man's sensitive nostrils he presently realized that beneath him was
some huge reptile feeding upon the carcass of the lion that had been
slain there earlier in the night.

As Tarzan's eyes, straining with curiosity, bored futilely into the
dark shadows he felt a light touch upon his shoulder, and, turning, saw
that his companion was attempting to attract his attention. The
creature, pressing a forefinger to his own lips as to enjoin silence,
attempted by pulling on Tarzan's arm to indicate that they should leave
at once.

Realizing that he was in a strange country, evidently infested by
creatures of titanic size, with the habits and powers of which he was
entirely unfamiliar, the ape-man permitted himself to be drawn away.
With the utmost caution the pithecanthropus descended the tree upon the
opposite side from the great nocturnal prowler, and, closely followed
by Tarzan, moved silently away through the night across the plain.

The ape-man was rather loath thus to relinquish an opportunity to
inspect a creature which he realized was probably entirely different
from anything in his past experience; yet he was wise enough to know
when discretion was the better part of valor and now, as in the past,
he yielded to that law which dominates the kindred of the wild,
preventing them from courting danger uselessly, whose lives are
sufficiently filled with danger in their ordinary routine of feeding
and mating.

As the rising sun dispelled the shadows of the night, Tarzan found
himself again upon the verge of a great forest into which his guide
plunged, taking nimbly to the branches of the trees through which he
made his way with the celerity of long habitude and hereditary
instinct, but though aided by a prehensile tail, fingers, and toes, the
man-thing moved through the forest with no greater ease or surety than
did the giant ape-man.

It was during this journey that Tarzan recalled the wound in his side
inflicted upon him the previous night by the raking talons of Numa, the
lion, and examining it was surprised to discover that not only was it
painless but along its edges were no indications of inflammation, the
results doubtless of the antiseptic powder his strange companion had
sprinkled upon it.

They had proceeded for a mile or two when Tarzan's companion came to
earth upon a grassy slope beneath a great tree whose branches overhung
a clear brook. Here they drank and Tarzan discovered the water to be
not only deliciously pure and fresh but of an icy temperature that
indicated its rapid descent from the lofty mountains of its origin.

Casting aside his loin cloth and weapons Tarzan entered the little pool
beneath the tree and after a moment emerged, greatly refreshed and
filled with a keen desire to breakfast. As he came out of the pool he
noticed his companion examining him with a puzzled expression upon his
face. Taking the ape-man by the shoulder he turned him around so that
Tarzan's back was toward him and then, touching the end of Tarzan's
spine with his forefinger, he curled his own tail up over his shoulder
and, wheeling the ape-man about again, pointed first at Tarzan and then
at his own caudal appendage, a look of puzzlement upon his face, the
while he jabbered excitedly in his strange tongue.

The ape-man realized that probably for the first time his companion had
discovered that he was tailless by nature rather than by accident, and
so he called attention to his own great toes and thumbs to further
impress upon the creature that they were of different species.

The fellow shook his head dubiously as though entirely unable to
comprehend why Tarzan should differ so from him but at last, apparently
giving the problem up with a shrug, he laid aside his own harness,
skin, and weapons and entered the pool.

His ablutions completed and his meager apparel redonned he seated
himself at the foot of the tree and motioning Tarzan to a place beside
him, opened the pouch that hung at his right side taking from it strips
of dried flesh and a couple of handfuls of thin-shelled nuts with which
Tarzan was unfamiliar. Seeing the other break them with his teeth and
eat the kernel, Tarzan followed the example thus set him, discovering
the meat to be rich and well flavored. The dried flesh also was far
from unpalatable, though it had evidently been jerked without salt, a
commodity which Tarzan imagined might be rather difficult to obtain in
this locality.

As they ate Tarzan's companion pointed to the nuts, the dried meat, and
various other nearby objects, in each instance repeating what Tarzan
readily discovered must be the names of these things in the creature's
native language. The ape-man could but smile at this evident desire
upon the part of his new-found acquaintance to impart to him
instructions that eventually might lead to an exchange of thoughts
between them. Having already mastered several languages and a multitude
of dialects the ape-man felt that he could readily assimilate another
even though this appeared one entirely unrelated to any with which he
was familiar.

So occupied were they with their breakfast and the lesson that neither
was aware of the beady eyes glittering down upon them from above; nor
was Tarzan cognizant of any impending danger until the instant that a
huge, hairy body leaped full upon his companion from the branches above
them.



2

"To the Death!"

In the moment of discovery Tarzan saw that the creature was almost a
counterpart of his companion in size and conformation, with the
exception that his body was entirely clothed with a coat of shaggy
black hair which almost concealed his features, while his harness and
weapons were similar to those of the creature he had attacked. Ere
Tarzan could prevent the creature had struck the ape-man's companion a
blow upon the head with his knotted club that felled him, unconscious,
to the earth; but before he could inflict further injury upon his
defenseless prey the ape-man had closed with him.

Instantly Tarzan realized that he was locked with a creature of almost
superhuman strength. The sinewy fingers of a powerful hand sought his
throat while the other lifted the bludgeon above his head. But if the
strength of the hairy attacker was great, great too was that of his
smooth-skinned antagonist. Swinging a single terrific blow with
clenched fist to the point of the other's chin, Tarzan momentarily
staggered his assailant and then his own fingers closed upon the shaggy
throat, as with the other hand he seized the wrist of the arm that
swung the club. With equal celerity he shot his right leg behind the
shaggy brute and throwing his weight forward hurled the thing over his
hip heavily to the ground, at the same time precipitating his own body
upon the other's chest.

With the shock of the impact the club fell from the brute's hand and
Tarzan's hold was wrenched from its throat. Instantly the two were
locked in a deathlike embrace. Though the creature bit at Tarzan the
latter was quickly aware that this was not a particularly formidable
method of offense or defense, since its canines were scarcely more
developed than his own. The thing that he had principally to guard
against was the sinuous tail which sought steadily to wrap itself about
his throat and against which experience had afforded him no defense.

Struggling and snarling the two rolled growling about the sward at the
foot of the tree, first one on top and then the other but each more
occupied at present in defending his throat from the other's choking
grasp than in aggressive, offensive tactics. But presently the ape-man
saw his opportunity and as they rolled about he forced the creature
closer and closer to the pool, upon the banks of which the battle was
progressing. At last they lay upon the very verge of the water and now
it remained for Tarzan to precipitate them both beneath the surface but
in such a way that he might remain on top.

At the same instant there came within range of Tarzan's vision, just
behind the prostrate form of his companion, the crouching, devil-faced
figure of the striped saber-tooth hybrid, eyeing him with snarling,
malevolent face.

Almost simultaneously Tarzan's shaggy antagonist discovered the
menacing figure of the great cat. Immediately he ceased his belligerent
activities against Tarzan and, jabbering and chattering to the ape-man,
he tried to disengage himself from Tarzan's hold but in such a way that
indicated that as far as he was concerned their battle was over.
Appreciating the danger to his unconscious companion and being anxious
to protect him from the saber-tooth the ape-man relinquished his hold
upon his adversary and together the two rose to their feet.

Drawing his knife Tarzan moved slowly toward the body of his companion,
expecting that his recent antagonist would grasp the opportunity for
escape. To his surprise, however, the beast, after regaining its club,
advanced at his side.

The great cat, flattened upon its belly, remained motionless except for
twitching tail and snarling lips where it lay perhaps fifty feet beyond
the body of the pithecanthropus. As Tarzan stepped over the body of the
latter he saw the eyelids quiver and open, and in his heart he felt a
strange sense of relief that the creature was not dead and a
realization that without his suspecting it there had arisen within his
savage bosom a bond of attachment for this strange new friend.

Tarzan continued to approach the saber-tooth, nor did the shaggy beast
at his right lag behind. Closer and closer they came until at a
distance of about twenty feet the hybrid charged. Its rush was directed
toward the shaggy manlike ape who halted in his tracks with upraised
bludgeon to meet the assault. Tarzan, on the contrary, leaped forward
and with a celerity second not even to that of the swift-moving cat, he
threw himself headlong upon him as might a Rugby tackler on an American
gridiron. His right arm circled the beast's neck in front of the right
shoulder, his left behind the left foreleg, and so great was the force
of the impact that the two rolled over and over several times upon the
ground, the cat screaming and clawing to liberate itself that it might
turn upon its attacker, the man clinging desperately to his hold.

Seemingly the attack was one of mad, senseless ferocity unguided by
either reason or skill. Nothing, however, could have been farther from
the truth than such an assumption since every muscle in the ape-man's
giant frame obeyed the dictates of the cunning mind that long
experience had trained to meet every exigency of such an encounter. The
long, powerful legs, though seemingly inextricably entangled with the
hind feet of the clawing cat, ever as by a miracle, escaped the raking
talons and yet at just the proper instant in the midst of all the
rolling and tossing they were where they should be to carry out the
ape-man's plan of offense. So that on the instant that the cat believed
it had won the mastery of its antagonist it was jerked suddenly upward
as the ape-man rose to his feet, holding the striped back close against
his body as he rose and forcing it backward until it could but claw the
air helplessly.

Instantly the shaggy black rushed in with drawn knife which it buried
in the beast's heart. For a few moments Tarzan retained his hold but
when the body had relaxed in final dissolution he pushed it from him
and the two who had formerly been locked in mortal combat stood facing
each other across the body of the common foe.

Tarzan waited, ready either for peace or war. Presently two shaggy
black hands were raised; the left was laid upon its own heart and the
right extended until the palm touched Tarzan's breast. It was the same
form of friendly salutation with which the pithecanthropus had sealed
his alliance with the ape-man and Tarzan, glad of every ally he could
win in this strange and savage world, quickly accepted the proffered
friendship.

At the conclusion of the brief ceremony Tarzan, glancing in the
direction of the hairless pithecanthropus, discovered that the latter
had recovered consciousness and was sitting erect watching them
intently. He now rose slowly and at the same time the shaggy black
turned in his direction and addressed him in what evidently was their
common language. The hairless one replied and the two approached each
other slowly. Tarzan watched interestedly the outcome of their meeting.
They halted a few paces apart, first one and then the other speaking
rapidly but without apparent excitement, each occasionally glancing or
nodding toward Tarzan, indicating that he was to some extent the
subject of their conversation.

Presently they advanced again until they met, whereupon was repeated
the brief ceremony of alliance which had previously marked the
cessation of hostilities between Tarzan and the black.  They then
advanced toward the ape-man addressing him earnestly as though
endeavoring to convey to him some important information.  Presently,
however, they gave it up as an unprofitable job and, resorting to sign
language, conveyed to Tarzan that they were proceeding upon their way
together and were urging him to accompany them.

As the direction they indicated was a route which Tarzan had not
previously traversed he was extremely willing to accede to their
request, as he had determined thoroughly to explore this unknown land
before definitely abandoning search for Lady Jane therein.

For several days their way led through the foothills parallel to the
lofty range towering above. Often were they menaced by the savage
denizens of this remote fastness, and occasionally Tarzan glimpsed
weird forms of gigantic proportions amidst the shadows of the nights.

On the third day they came upon a large natural cave in the face of a
low cliff at the foot of which tumbled one of the numerous mountain
brooks that watered the plain below and fed the morasses in the
lowlands at the country's edge. Here the three took up their temporary
abode where Tarzan's instruction in the language of his companions
progressed more rapidly than while on the march.

The cave gave evidence of having harbored other manlike forms in the
past. Remnants of a crude, rock fireplace remained and the walls and
ceiling were blackened with the smoke of many fires. Scratched in the
soot, and sometimes deeply into the rock beneath, were strange
hieroglyphics and the outlines of beasts and birds and reptiles, some
of the latter of weird form suggesting the extinct creatures of
Jurassic times. Some of the more recently made hieroglyphics Tarzan's
companions read with interest and commented upon, and then with the
points of their knives they too added to the possibly age-old record of
the blackened walls.

Tarzan's curiosity was aroused, but the only explanation at which he
could arrive was that he was looking upon possibly the world's most
primitive hotel register. At least it gave him a further insight into
the development of the strange creatures with which Fate had thrown
him. Here were men with the tails of monkeys, one of them as hair
covered as any fur-bearing brute of the lower orders, and yet it was
evident that they possessed not only a spoken, but a written language.
The former he was slowly mastering and at this new evidence of
unlooked-for civilization in creatures possessing so many of the
physical attributes of beasts, Tarzan's curiosity was still further
piqued and his desire quickly to master their tongue strengthened, with
the result that he fell to with even greater assiduity to the task he
had set himself. Already he knew the names of his companions and the
common names of the fauna and flora with which they had most often come
in contact.

Ta-den, he of the hairless, white skin, having assumed the role of
tutor, prosecuted his task with a singleness of purpose that was
reflected in his pupil's rapid mastery of Ta-den's mother tongue.
Om-at, the hairy black, also seemed to feel that there rested upon his
broad shoulders a portion of the burden of responsibility for Tarzan's
education, with the result that either one or the other of them was
almost constantly coaching the ape-man during his waking hours. The
result was only what might have been expected--a rapid assimilation of
the teachings to the end that before any of them realized it,
communication by word of mouth became an accomplished fact.

Tarzan explained to his companions the purpose of his mission but
neither could give him any slightest thread of hope to weave into the
fabric of his longing. Never had there been in their country a woman
such as he described, nor any tailless man other than himself that they
ever had seen.

"I have been gone from A-lur while Bu, the moon, has eaten seven
times," said Ta-den. "Many things may happen in seven times
twenty-eight days; but I doubt that your woman could have entered our
country across the terrible morasses which even you found an almost
insurmountable obstacle, and if she had, could she have survived the
perils that you already have encountered beside those of which you have
yet to learn? Not even our own women venture into the savage lands
beyond the cities."

"'A-lur,' Light-city, City of Light," mused Tarzan, translating the
word into his own tongue. "And where is A-lur?" he asked. "Is it your
city, Ta-den, and Om-at's?"

"It is mine," replied the hairless one; "but not Om-at's. The Waz-don
have no cities--they live in the trees of the forests and the caves of
the hills--is it not so, black man?" he concluded, turning toward the
hairy giant beside him.

"Yes," replied Om-at, "We Waz-don are free--only the Hodon imprison
themselves in cities. I would not be a white man!"

Tarzan smiled. Even here was the racial distinction between white man
and black man--Ho-don and Waz-don. Not even the fact that they appeared
to be equals in the matter of intelligence made any difference--one was
white and one was black, and it was easy to see that the white
considered himself superior to the other--one could see it in his quiet
smile.

"Where is A-lur?" Tarzan asked again. "You are returning to it?"

"It is beyond the mountains," replied Ta-den. "I do not return to
it--not yet. Not until Ko-tan is no more."

"Ko-tan?" queried Tarzan.

"Ko-tan is king," explained the pithecanthropus. "He rules this land. I
was one of his warriors. I lived in the palace of Ko-tan and there I
met O-lo-a, his daughter. We loved, Likestar-light, and I; but Ko-tan
would have none of me. He sent me away to fight with the men of the
village of Dak-at, who had refused to pay his tribute to the king,
thinking that I would be killed, for Dak-at is famous for his many fine
warriors. And I was not killed.  Instead I returned victorious with the
tribute and with Dak-at himself my prisoner; but Ko-tan was not pleased
because he saw that O-lo-a loved me even more than before, her love
being strengthened and fortified by pride in my achievement.

"Powerful is my father, Ja-don, the Lion-man, chief of the largest
village outside of A-lur. Him Ko-tan hesitated to affront and so he
could not but praise me for my success, though he did it with half a
smile. But you do not understand! It is what we call a smile that moves
only the muscles of the face and affects not the light of the eyes--it
means hypocrisy and duplicity. I must be praised and rewarded. What
better than that he reward me with the hand of O-lo-a, his daughter?
But no, he saves O-lo-a for Bu-lot, son of Mo-sar, the chief whose
great-grandfather was king and who thinks that he should be king. Thus
would Ko-tan appease the wrath of Mo-sar and win the friendship of
those who think with Mo-sar that Mo-sar should be king.

"But what reward shall repay the faithful Ta-den? Greatly do we honor
our priests. Within the temples even the chiefs and the king himself
bow down to them. No greater honor could Ko-tan confer upon a
subject--who wished to be a priest, but I did not so wish. Priests
other than the high priest must become eunuchs for they may never marry.

"It was O-lo-a herself who brought word to me that her father had given
the commands that would set in motion the machinery of the temple. A
messenger was on his way in search of me to summon me to Ko-tan's
presence. To have refused the priesthood once it was offered me by the
king would have been to have affronted the temple and the gods--that
would have meant death; but if I did not appear before Ko-tan I would
not have to refuse anything.  O-lo-a and I decided that I must not
appear. It was better to fly, carrying in my bosom a shred of hope,
than to remain and, with my priesthood, abandon hope forever.

"Beneath the shadows of the great trees that grow within the palace
grounds I pressed her to me for, perhaps, the last time and then, lest
by ill-fate I meet the messenger, I scaled the great wall that guards
the palace and passed through the darkened city. My name and rank
carried me beyond the city gate. Since then I have wandered far from
the haunts of the Ho-don but strong within me is the urge to return if
even but to look from without her walls upon the city that holds her
most dear to me and again to visit the village of my birth, to see
again my father and my mother."

"But the risk is too great?" asked Tarzan.

"It is great, but not too great," replied Ta-den. "I shall go."

"And I shall go with you, if I may," said the ape-man, "for I must see
this City of Light, this A-lur of yours, and search there for my lost
mate even though you believe that there is little chance that I find
her. And you, Om-at, do you come with us?"

"Why not?" asked the hairy one. "The lairs of my tribe lie in the crags
above A-lur and though Es-sat, our chief, drove me out I should like to
return again, for there is a she there upon whom I should be glad to
look once more and who would be glad to look upon me. Yes, I will go
with you. Es-sat feared that I might become chief and who knows but
that Es-sat was right. But Pan-at-lee! it is she I seek first even
before a chieftainship."

"We three, then, shall travel together," said Tarzan.

"And fight together," added Ta-den; "the three as one," and as he spoke
he drew his knife and held it above his head.

"The three as one," repeated Om-at, drawing his weapon and duplicating
Ta-den's act. "It is spoken!"

"The three as one!" cried Tarzan of the Apes. "To the death!" and his
blade flashed in the sunlight.

"Let us go, then," said Om-at; "my knife is dry and cries aloud for the
blood of Es-sat."

The trail over which Ta-den and Om-at led and which scarcely could be
dignified even by the name of trail was suited more to mountain sheep,
monkeys, or birds than to man; but the three that followed it were
trained to ways which no ordinary man might essay. Now, upon the lower
slopes, it led through dense forests where the ground was so matted
with fallen trees and over-rioting vines and brush that the way held
always to the swaying branches high above the tangle; again it skirted
yawning gorges whose slippery-faced rocks gave but momentary foothold
even to the bare feet that lightly touched them as the three leaped
chamois-like from one precarious foothold to the next. Dizzy and
terrifying was the way that Om-at chose across the summit as he led
them around the shoulder of a towering crag that rose a sheer two
thousand feet of perpendicular rock above a tumbling river. And when at
last they stood upon comparatively level ground again Om-at turned and
looked at them both intently and especially at Tarzan of the Apes.

"You will both do," he said. "You are fit companions for Om-at, the
Waz-don."

"What do you mean?" asked Tarzan.

"I brought you this way," replied the black, "to learn if either lacked
the courage to follow where Om-at led. It is here that the young
warriors of Es-sat come to prove their courage. And yet, though we are
born and raised upon cliff sides, it is considered no disgrace to admit
that Pastar-ul-ved, the Father of Mountains, has defeated us, for of
those who try it only a few succeed--the bones of the others lie at the
feet of Pastar-ul-ved."

Ta-den laughed. "I would not care to come this way often," he said.

"No," replied Om-at; "but it has shortened our journey by at least a
full day. So much the sooner shall Tarzan look upon the Valley of
Jad-ben-Otho. Come!" and he led the way upward along the shoulder of
Pastar-ul-ved until there lay spread below them a scene of mystery and
of beauty--a green valley girt by towering cliffs of marble
whiteness--a green valley dotted by deep blue lakes and crossed by the
blue trail of a winding river. In the center a city of the whiteness of
the marble cliffs--a city which even at so great a distance evidenced a
strange, yet artistic architecture. Outside the city there were visible
about the valley isolated groups of buildings--sometimes one, again two
and three and four in a cluster--but always of the same glaring
whiteness, and always in some fantastic form.

About the valley the cliffs were occasionally cleft by deep gorges,
verdure filled, giving the appearance of green rivers rioting downward
toward a central sea of green.

"Jad Pele ul Jad-ben-Otho," murmured Tarzan in the tongue of the
pithecanthropi; "The Valley of the Great God--it is beautiful!"

"Here, in A-lur, lives Ko-tan, the king, ruler over all Pal-ul-don,"
said Ta-den.

"And here in these gorges live the Waz-don," exclaimed Om-at, "who do
not acknowledge that Ko-tan is the ruler over all the Land-of-man."

Ta-den smiled and shrugged. "We will not quarrel, you and I," he said
to Om-at, "over that which all the ages have not proved sufficient time
in which to reconcile the Ho-don and Waz-don; but let me whisper to you
a secret, Om-at. The Ho-don live together in greater or less peace
under one ruler so that when danger threatens them they face the enemy
with many warriors, for every fighting Ho-don of Pal-ul-don is there.
But you Waz-don, how is it with you? You have a dozen kings who fight
not only with the Ho-don but with one another. When one of your tribes
goes forth upon the fighting trail, even against the Ho-don, it must
leave behind sufficient warriors to protect its women and its children
from the neighbors upon either hand. When we want eunuchs for the
temples or servants for the fields or the homes we march forth in great
numbers upon one of your villages. You cannot even flee, for upon
either side of you are enemies and though you fight bravely we come
back with those who will presently be eunuchs in the temples and
servants in our fields and homes. So long as the Waz-don are thus
foolish the Ho-don will dominate and their king will be king of
Pal-ul-don."

"Perhaps you are right," admitted Om-at. "It is because our neighbors
are fools, each thinking that his tribe is the greatest and should rule
among the Waz-don. They will not admit that the warriors of my tribe
are the bravest and our shes the most beautiful."

Ta-den grinned. "Each of the others presents precisely the same
arguments that you present, Om-at," he said, "which, my friend, is the
strongest bulwark of defense possessed by the Ho-don."

"Come!" exclaimed Tarzan; "such discussions often lead to quarrels and
we three must have no quarrels. I, of course, am interested in learning
what I can of the political and economic conditions of your land; I
should like to know something of your religion; but not at the expense
of bitterness between my only friends in Pal-ul-don. Possibly, however,
you hold to the same god?"

"There indeed we do differ," cried Om-at, somewhat bitterly and with a
trace of excitement in his voice.

"Differ!" almost shouted Ta-den; "and why should we not differ? Who
could agree with the preposterous----"

"Stop!" cried Tarzan. "Now, indeed, have I stirred up a hornets' nest.
Let us speak no more of matters political or religious."

"That is wiser," agreed Om-at; "but I might mention, for your
information, that the one and only god has a long tail."

"It is sacrilege," cried Ta-den, laying his hand upon his knife;
"Jad-ben-Otho has no tail!"

"Stop!" shrieked Om-at, springing forward; but instantly Tarzan
interposed himself between them.

"Enough!" he snapped. "Let us be true to our oaths of friendship that
we may be honorable in the sight of God in whatever form we conceive
Him."

"You are right, Tailless One," said Ta-den. "Come, Om-at, let us look
after our friendship and ourselves, secure in the conviction that
Jad-ben-Otho is sufficiently powerful to look after himself."

"Done!" agreed Om-at, "but----"

"No 'buts,' Om-at," admonished Tarzan.

The shaggy black shrugged his shoulders and smiled. "Shall we make our
way down toward the valley?" he asked. "The gorge below us is
uninhabited; that to the left contains the caves of my people. I would
see Pan-at-lee once more. Ta-den would visit his father in the valley
below and Tarzan seeks entrance to A-lur in search of the mate that
would be better dead than in the clutches of the Ho-don priests of
Jad-ben-Otho. How shall we proceed?"

"Let us remain together as long as possible," urged Ta-den.  "You,
Om-at, must seek Pan-at-lee by night and by stealth, for three, even we
three, may not hope to overcome Es-sat and all his warriors. At any
time may we go to the village where my father is chief, for Ja-don
always will welcome the friends of his son. But for Tarzan to enter
A-lur is another matter, though there is a way and he has the courage
to put it to the test--listen, come close for Jad-ben-Otho has keen
ears and this he must not hear," and with his lips close to the ears of
his companions Ta-den, the Tall-tree, son of Ja-don, the Lion-man,
unfolded his daring plan.

And at the same moment, a hundred miles away, a lithe figure, naked but
for a loin cloth and weapons, moved silently across a thorn-covered,
waterless steppe, searching always along the ground before him with
keen eyes and sensitive nostrils.



3

Pan-at-lee

Night had fallen upon unchartered Pal-ul-don. A slender moon, low in
the west, bathed the white faces of the chalk cliffs presented to her,
in a mellow, unearthly glow. Black were the shadows in Kor-ul-JA,
Gorge-of-lions, where dwelt the tribe of the same name under Es-sat,
their chief. From an aperture near the summit of the lofty escarpment a
hairy figure emerged--the head and shoulders first--and fierce eyes
scanned the cliff side in every direction.

It was Es-sat, the chief. To right and left and below he looked as
though to assure himself that he was unobserved, but no other figure
moved upon the cliff face, nor did another hairy body protrude from any
of the numerous cave mouths from the high-flung abode of the chief to
the habitations of the more lowly members of the tribe nearer the
cliff's base. Then he moved outward upon the sheer face of the white
chalk wall. In the half-light of the baby moon it appeared that the
heavy, shaggy black figure moved across the face of the perpendicular
wall in some miraculous manner, but closer examination would have
revealed stout pegs, as large around as a man's wrist protruding from
holes in the cliff into which they were driven. Es-sat's four handlike
members and his long, sinuous tail permitted him to move with
consummate ease whither he chose--a gigantic rat upon a mighty wall. As
he progressed upon his way he avoided the cave mouths, passing either
above or below those that lay in his path.

The outward appearance of these caves was similar. An opening from
eight to as much as twenty feet long by eight high and four to six feet
deep was cut into the chalklike rock of the cliff, in the back of this
large opening, which formed what might be described as the front
veranda of the home, was an opening about three feet wide and six feet
high, evidently forming the doorway to the interior apartment or
apartments. On either side of this doorway were smaller openings which
it were easy to assume were windows through which light and air might
find their way to the inhabitants. Similar windows were also dotted
over the cliff face between the entrance porches, suggesting that the
entire face of the cliff was honeycombed with apartments. From many of
these smaller apertures small streams of water trickled down the
escarpment, and the walls above others was blackened as by smoke.
Where the water ran the wall was eroded to a depth of from a few inches
to as much as a foot, suggesting that some of the tiny streams had been
trickling downward to the green carpet of vegetation below for ages.

In this primeval setting the great pithecanthropus aroused no jarring
discord for he was as much a part of it as the trees that grew upon the
summit of the cliff or those that hid their feet among the dank ferns
in the bottom of the gorge.

Now he paused before an entrance-way and listened and then, noiselessly
as the moonlight upon the trickling waters, he merged with the shadows
of the outer porch. At the doorway leading into the interior he paused
again, listening, and then quietly pushing aside the heavy skin that
covered the aperture he passed within a large chamber hewn from the
living rock. From the far end, through another doorway, shone a light,
dimly. Toward this he crept with utmost stealth, his naked feet giving
forth no sound.  The knotted club that had been hanging at his back
from a thong about his neck he now removed and carried in his left hand.

Beyond the second doorway was a corridor running parallel with the
cliff face. In this corridor were three more doorways, one at each end
and a third almost opposite that in which Es-sat stood.  The light was
coming from an apartment at the end of the corridor at his left. A
sputtering flame rose and fell in a small stone receptacle that stood
upon a table or bench of the same material, a monolithic bench
fashioned at the time the room was excavated, rising massively from the
floor, of which it was a part.

In one corner of the room beyond the table had been left a dais of
stone about four feet wide and eight feet long. Upon this were piled a
foot or so of softly tanned pelts from which the fur had not been
removed. Upon the edge of this dais sat a young female Waz-don. In one
hand she held a thin piece of metal, apparently of hammered gold, with
serrated edges, and in the other a short, stiff brush. With these she
was occupied in going over her smooth, glossy coat which bore a
remarkable resemblance to plucked sealskin. Her loin cloth of yellow
and black striped JATO-skin lay on the couch beside her with the
circular breastplates of beaten gold, revealing the symmetrical lines
of her nude figure in all its beauty and harmony of contour, for even
though the creature was jet black and entirely covered with hair yet
she was undeniably beautiful.

That she was beautiful in the eyes of Es-sat, the chief, was evidenced
by the gloating expression upon his fierce countenance and the
increased rapidity of his breathing. Moving quickly forward he entered
the room and as he did so the young she looked up. Instantly her eyes
filled with terror and as quickly she seized the loin cloth and with a
few deft movements adjusted it about her. As she gathered up her
breastplates Es-sat rounded the table and moved quickly toward her.

"What do you want?" she whispered, though she knew full well.

"Pan-at-lee," he said, "your chief has come for you."

"It was for this that you sent away my father and my brothers to spy
upon the Kor-ul-lul? I will not have you. Leave the cave of my
ancestors!"

Es-sat smiled. It was the smile of a strong and wicked man who knows
his power--not a pleasant smile at all. "I will leave, Pan-at-lee," he
said; "but you shall go with me--to the cave of Es-sat, the chief, to
be the envied of the shes of Kor-ul-JA.  Come!"

"Never!" cried Pan-at-lee. "I hate you. Sooner would I mate with a
Ho-don than with you, beater of women, murderer of babes."

A frightful scowl distorted the features of the chief. "She-JATO!" he
cried. "I will tame you! I will break you! Es-sat, the chief, takes
what he will and who dares question his right, or combat his least
purpose, will first serve that purpose and then be broken as I break
this," and he picked a stone platter from the table and broke it in his
powerful hands. "You might have been first and most favored in the cave
of the ancestors of Es-sat; but now shall you be last and least and
when I am done with you you shall belong to all of the men of Es-sat's
cave. Thus for those who spurn the love of their chief!"

He advanced quickly to seize her and as he laid a rough hand upon her
she struck him heavily upon the side of his head with her golden
breastplates. Without a sound Es-sat, the chief, sank to the floor of
the apartment. For a moment Pan-at-lee bent over him, her improvised
weapon raised to strike again should he show signs of returning
consciousness, her glossy breasts rising and falling with her quickened
breathing. Suddenly she stooped and removed Es-sat's knife with its
scabbard and shoulder belt.  Slipping it over her own shoulder she
quickly adjusted her breastplates and keeping a watchful glance upon
the figure of the fallen chief, backed from the room.

In a niche in the outer room, just beside the doorway leading to the
balcony, were neatly piled a number of rounded pegs from eighteen to
twenty inches in length. Selecting five of these she made them into a
little bundle about which she twined the lower extremity of her sinuous
tail and thus carrying them made her way to the outer edge of the
balcony. Assuring herself that there was none about to see, or hinder
her, she took quickly to the pegs already set in the face of the cliff
and with the celerity of a monkey clambered swiftly aloft to the
highest row of pegs which she followed in the direction of the lower
end of the gorge for a matter of some hundred yards. Here, above her
head, were a series of small round holes placed one above another in
three parallel rows. Clinging only with her toes she removed two of the
pegs from the bundle carried in her tail and taking one in either hand
she inserted them in two opposite holes of the outer rows as far above
her as she could reach. Hanging by these new holds she now took one of
the three remaining pegs in each of her feet, leaving the fifth grasped
securely in her tail. Reaching above her with this member she inserted
the fifth peg in one of the holes of the center row and then,
alternately hanging by her tail, her feet, or her hands, she moved the
pegs upward to new holes, thus carrying her stairway with her as she
ascended.

At the summit of the cliff a gnarled tree exposed its time-worn roots
above the topmost holes forming the last step from the sheer face of
the precipice to level footing. This was the last avenue of escape for
members of the tribe hard pressed by enemies from below. There were
three such emergency exits from the village and it were death to use
them in other than an emergency.  This Pan-at-lee well knew; but she
knew, too, that it were worse than death to remain where the angered
Es-sat might lay hands upon her.

When she had gained the summit, the girl moved quickly through the
darkness in the direction of the next gorge which cut the mountain-side
a mile beyond Kor-ul-JA. It was the Gorge-of-water, Kor-ul-lul, to
which her father and two brothers had been sent by Es-sat ostensibly to
spy upon the neighboring tribe. There was a chance, a slender chance,
that she might find them; if not there was the deserted Kor-ul-GRYF
several miles beyond, where she might hide indefinitely from man if she
could elude the frightful monster from which the gorge derived its name
and whose presence there had rendered its caves uninhabitable for
generations.

Pan-at-lee crept stealthily along the rim of the Kor-ul-lul. Just where
her father and brothers would watch she did not know. Sometimes their
spies remained upon the rim, sometimes they watched from the gorge's
bottom. Pan-at-lee was at a loss to know what to do or where to go. She
felt very small and helpless alone in the vast darkness of the night.
Strange noises fell upon her ears. They came from the lonely reaches of
the towering mountains above her, from far away in the invisible valley
and from the nearer foothills and once, in the distance, she heard what
she thought was the bellow of a bull GRYF. It came from the direction
of the Kor-ul-GRYF. She shuddered.

Presently there came to her keen ears another sound. Something
approached her along the rim of the gorge. It was coming from above.
She halted, listening. Perhaps it was her father, or a brother. It was
coming closer. She strained her eyes through the darkness. She did not
move--she scarcely breathed. And then, of a sudden, quite close it
seemed, there blazed through the black night two yellow-green spots of
fire.

Pan-at-lee was brave, but as always with the primitive, the darkness
held infinite terrors for her. Not alone the terrors of the known but
more frightful ones as well--those of the unknown.  She had passed
through much this night and her nerves were keyed to the highest
pitch--raw, taut nerves, they were, ready to react in an exaggerated
form to the slightest shock.

But this was no slight shock. To hope for a father and a brother and to
see death instead glaring out of the darkness! Yes, Pan-at-lee was
brave, but she was not of iron. With a shriek that reverberated among
the hills she turned and fled along the rim of Kor-ul-lul and behind
her, swiftly, came the devil-eyed lion of the mountains of Pal-ul-don.

Pan-at-lee was lost. Death was inevitable. Of this there could be no
doubt, but to die beneath the rending fangs of the carnivore,
congenital terror of her kind--it was unthinkable. But there was an
alternative. The lion was almost upon her--another instant and he would
seize her. Pan-at-lee turned sharply to her left.  Just a few steps she
took in the new direction before she disappeared over the rim of
Kor-ul-lul. The baffled lion, planting all four feet, barely stopped
upon the verge of the abyss. Glaring down into the black shadows
beneath he mounted an angry roar.

Through the darkness at the bottom of Kor-ul-JA, Om-at led the way
toward the caves of his people. Behind him came Tarzan and Ta-den.
Presently they halted beneath a great tree that grew close to the cliff.

"First," whispered Om-at, "I will go to the cave of Pan-at-lee. Then
will I seek the cave of my ancestors to have speech with my own blood.
It will not take long. Wait here--I shall return soon. Afterward shall
we go together to Ta-den's people."

He moved silently toward the foot of the cliff up which Tarzan could
presently see him ascending like a great fly on a wall. In the dim
light the ape-man could not see the pegs set in the face of the cliff.
Om-at moved warily. In the lower tier of caves there should be a
sentry. His knowledge of his people and their customs told him,
however, that in all probability the sentry was asleep. In this he was
not mistaken, yet he did not in any way abate his wariness. Smoothly
and swiftly he ascended toward the cave of Pan-at-lee while from below
Tarzan and Ta-den watched him.

"How does he do it?" asked Tarzan. "I can see no foothold upon that
vertical surface and yet he appears to be climbing with the utmost
ease."

Ta-den explained the stairway of pegs. "You could ascend easily," he
said, "although a tail would be of great assistance."

They watched until Om-at was about to enter the cave of Pan-at-lee
without seeing any indication that he had been observed and then,
simultaneously, both saw a head appear in the mouth of one of the lower
caves. It was quickly evident that its owner had discovered Om-at for
immediately he started upward in pursuit. Without a word Tarzan and
Ta-den sprang forward toward the foot of the cliff. The pithecanthropus
was the first to reach it and the ape-man saw him spring upward for a
handhold on the lowest peg above him. Now Tarzan saw other pegs roughly
paralleling each other in zigzag rows up the cliff face. He sprang and
caught one of these, pulled himself upward by one hand until he could
reach a second with his other hand; and when he had ascended far enough
to use his feet, discovered that he could make rapid progress. Ta-den
was outstripping him, however, for these precarious ladders were no
novelty to him and, further, he had an advantage in possessing a tail.

Nevertheless, the ape-man gave a good account of himself, being
presently urged to redoubled efforts by the fact that the Waz-don above
Ta-den glanced down and discovered his pursuers just before the Ho-don
overtook him. Instantly a wild cry shattered the silence of the
gorge--a cry that was immediately answered by hundreds of savage
throats as warrior after warrior emerged from the entrance to his cave.

The creature who had raised the alarm had now reached the recess before
Pan-at-lee's cave and here he halted and turned to give battle to
Ta-den. Unslinging his club which had hung down his back from a thong
about his neck he stood upon the level floor of the entrance-way
effectually blocking Ta-den's ascent. From all directions the warriors
of Kor-ul-JA were swarming toward the interlopers. Tarzan, who had
reached a point on the same level with Ta-den but a little to the
latter's left, saw that nothing short of a miracle could save them.
Just at the ape-man's left was the entrance to a cave that either was
deserted or whose occupants had not as yet been aroused, for the level
recess remained unoccupied. Resourceful was the alert mind of Tarzan of
the Apes and quick to respond were the trained muscles. In the time
that you or I might give to debating an action he would accomplish it
and now, though only seconds separated his nearest antagonist from him,
in the brief span of time at his disposal he had stepped into the
recess, unslung his long rope and leaning far out shot the sinuous
noose, with the precision of long habitude, toward the menacing figure
wielding its heavy club above Ta-den. There was a momentary pause of
the rope-hand as the noose sped toward its goal, a quick movement of
the right wrist that closed it upon its victim as it settled over his
head and then a surging tug as, seizing the rope in both hands, Tarzan
threw back upon it all the weight of his great frame.

Voicing a terrified shriek, the Waz-don lunged headforemost from the
recess above Ta-den. Tarzan braced himself for the coming shock when
the creature's body should have fallen the full length of the rope and
as it did there was a snap of the vertebrae that rose sickeningly in
the momentary silence that had followed the doomed man's departing
scream. Unshaken by the stress of the suddenly arrested weight at the
end of the rope, Tarzan quickly pulled the body to his side that he
might remove the noose from about its neck, for he could not afford to
lose so priceless a weapon.

During the several seconds that had elapsed since he cast the rope the
Waz-don warriors had remained inert as though paralyzed by wonder or by
terror. Now, again, one of them found his voice and his head and
straightway, shrieking invectives at the strange intruder, started
upward for the ape-man, urging his fellows to attack. This man was the
closest to Tarzan. But for him the ape-man could easily have reached
Ta-den's side as the latter was urging him to do. Tarzan raised the
body of the dead Waz-don above his head, held it poised there for a
moment as with face raised to the heavens he screamed forth the horrid
challenge of the bull apes of the tribe of Kerchak, and with all the
strength of his giant sinews he hurled the corpse heavily upon the
ascending warrior. So great was the force of the impact that not only
was the Waz-don torn from his hold but two of the pegs to which he
clung were broken short in their sockets.

As the two bodies, the living and the dead, hurtled downward toward the
foot of the cliff a great cry arose from the Waz-don. "Jad-guru-don!
Jad-guru-don!" they screamed, and then: "Kill him! Kill him!"

And now Tarzan stood in the recess beside Ta-den. "Jad-guru-don!"
repeated the latter, smiling--"The terrible man! Tarzan the Terrible!
They may kill you, but they will never forget you."

"They shall not ki--What have we here?" Tarzan's statement as to what
"they" should not do was interrupted by a sudden ejaculation as two
figures, locked in deathlike embrace, stumbled through the doorway of
the cave to the outer porch. One was Om-at, the other a creature of his
own kind but with a rough coat, the hairs of which seemed to grow
straight outward from the skin, stiffly, unlike Om-at's sleek covering.
The two were quite evidently well matched and equally evident was the
fact that each was bent upon murder. They fought almost in silence
except for an occasional low growl as one or the other acknowledged
thus some new hurt.

Tarzan, following a natural impulse to aid his ally, leaped forward to
enter the dispute only to be checked by a grunted admonition from
Om-at. "Back!" he said. "This fight is mine, alone."

The ape-man understood and stepped aside.

"It is a gund-bar," explained Ta-den, "a chief-battle. This fellow must
be Es-sat, the chief. If Om-at kills him without assistance Om-at may
become chief."

Tarzan smiled. It was the law of his own jungle--the law of the tribe
of Kerchak, the bull ape--the ancient law of primitive man that needed
but the refining influences of civilization to introduce the hired
dagger and the poison cup. Then his attention was drawn to the outer
edge of the vestibule. Above it appeared the shaggy face of one of
Es-sat's warriors. Tarzan sprang to intercept the man; but Ta-den was
there ahead of him.  "Back!" cried the Ho-don to the newcomer. "It is
gund-bar." The fellow looked scrutinizingly at the two fighters, then
turned his face downward toward his fellows. "Back!" he cried, "it is
gund-bar between Es-sat and Om-at." Then he looked back at Ta-den and
Tarzan. "Who are you?" he asked.

"We are Om-at's friends," replied Ta-den.

The fellow nodded. "We will attend to you later," he said and
disappeared below the edge of the recess.

The battle upon the ledge continued with unabated ferocity, Tarzan and
Ta-den having difficulty in keeping out of the way of the contestants
who tore and beat at each other with hands and feet and lashing tails.
Es-sat was unarmed--Pan-at-lee had seen to that--but at Om-at's side
swung a sheathed knife which he made no effort to draw. That would have
been contrary to their savage and primitive code for the chief-battle
must be fought with nature's weapons.

Sometimes they separated for an instant only to rush upon each other
again with all the ferocity and nearly the strength of mad bulls.
Presently one of them tripped the other but in that viselike embrace
one could not fall alone--Es-sat dragged Om-at with him, toppling upon
the brink of the niche. Even Tarzan held his breath. There they surged
to and fro perilously for a moment and then the inevitable
happened--the two, locked in murderous embrace, rolled over the edge
and disappeared from the ape-man's view.

Tarzan voiced a suppressed sigh for he had liked Om-at and then, with
Ta-den, approached the edge and looked over. Far below, in the dim
light of the coming dawn, two inert forms should be lying stark in
death; but, to Tarzan's amazement, such was far from the sight that met
his eyes. Instead, there were the two figures still vibrant with life
and still battling only a few feet below him. Clinging always to the
pegs with two holds--a hand and a foot, or a foot and a tail, they
seemed as much at home upon the perpendicular wall as upon the level
surface of the vestibule; but now their tactics were slightly altered,
for each seemed particularly bent upon dislodging his antagonist from
his holds and precipitating him to certain death below. It was soon
evident that Om-at, younger and with greater powers of endurance than
Es-sat, was gaining an advantage. Now was the chief almost wholly on
the defensive. Holding him by the cross belt with one mighty hand Om-at
was forcing his foeman straight out from the cliff, and with the other
hand and one foot was rapidly breaking first one of Es-sat's holds and
then another, alternating his efforts, or rather punctuating them, with
vicious blows to the pit of his adversary's stomach. Rapidly was Es-sat
weakening and with the knowledge of impending death there came, as
there comes to every coward and bully under similar circumstances, a
crumbling of the veneer of bravado which had long masqueraded as
courage and with it crumbled his code of ethics. Now was Es-sat no
longer chief of Kor-ul-JA--instead he was a whimpering craven battling
for life.  Clutching at Om-at, clutching at the nearest pegs he sought
any support that would save him from that awful fall, and as he strove
to push aside the hand of death, whose cold fingers he already felt
upon his heart, his tail sought Om-at's side and the handle of the
knife that hung there.

Tarzan saw and even as Es-sat drew the blade from its sheath he dropped
catlike to the pegs beside the battling men. Es-sat's tail had drawn
back for the cowardly fatal thrust. Now many others saw the perfidious
act and a great cry of rage and disgust arose from savage throats; but
as the blade sped toward its goal, the ape-man seized the hairy member
that wielded it, and at the same instant Om-at thrust the body of
Es-sat from him with such force that its weakened holds were broken and
it hurtled downward, a brief meteor of screaming fear, to death.



4

Tarzan-jad-guru

As Tarzan and Om-at clambered back to the vestibule of Pan-at-lee's
cave and took their stand beside Ta-den in readiness for whatever
eventuality might follow the death of Es-sat, the sun that topped the
eastern hills touched also the figure of a sleeper upon a distant,
thorn-covered steppe awakening him to another day of tireless tracking
along a faint and rapidly disappearing spoor.

For a time silence reigned in the Kor-ul-JA. The tribesmen waited,
looking now down upon the dead thing that had been their chief, now at
one another, and now at Om-at and the two who stood upon his either
side. Presently Om-at spoke. "I am Om-at," he cried. "Who will say that
Om-at is not gund of Kor-ul-JA?"

He waited for a taker of his challenge. One or two of the larger young
bucks fidgeted restlessly and eyed him; but there was no reply.

"Then Om-at is gund," he said with finality. "Now tell me, where are
Pan-at-lee, her father, and her brothers?"

An old warrior spoke. "Pan-at-lee should be in her cave. Who should
know that better than you who are there now? Her father and her
brothers were sent to watch Kor-ul-lul; but neither of these questions
arouse any tumult in our breasts. There is one that does: Can Om-at be
chief of Kor-ul-JA and yet stand at bay against his own people with a
Ho-don and that terrible man at his side--that terrible man who has no
tail? Hand the strangers over to your people to be slain as is the way
of the Waz-don and then may Om-at be gund."

Neither Tarzan nor Ta-den spoke then, they but stood watching Om-at and
waiting for his decision, the ghost of a smile upon the lips of the
ape-man. Ta-den, at least, knew that the old warrior had spoken the
truth--the Waz-don entertain no strangers and take no prisoners of an
alien race.

Then spoke Om-at. "Always there is change," he said. "Even the old
hills of Pal-ul-don appear never twice alike--the brilliant sun, a
passing cloud, the moon, a mist, the changing seasons, the sharp
clearness following a storm; these things bring each a new change in
our hills. From birth to death, day by day, there is constant change in
each of us. Change, then, is one of Jad-ben-Otho's laws.

"And now I, Om-at, your gund, bring another change. Strangers who are
brave men and good friends shall no longer be slain by the Waz-don of
Kor-ul-JA!"

There were growls and murmurings and a restless moving among the
warriors as each eyed the others to see who would take the initiative
against Om-at, the iconoclast.

"Cease your mutterings," admonished the new gund. "I am your chief. My
word is your law. You had no part in making me chief.  Some of you
helped Es-sat to drive me from the cave of my ancestors; the rest of
you permitted it. I owe you nothing. Only these two, whom you would
have me kill, were loyal to me. I am gund and if there be any who
doubts it let him speak--he cannot die younger."

Tarzan was pleased. Here was a man after his own heart. He admired the
fearlessness of Om-at's challenge and he was a sufficiently good judge
of men to know that he had listened to no idle bluff--Om-at would back
up his words to the death, if necessary, and the chances were that he
would not be the one to die. Evidently the majority of the
Kor-ul-jaians entertained the same conviction.

"I will make you a good gund," said Om-at, seeing that no one appeared
inclined to dispute his rights. "Your wives and daughters will be
safe--they were not safe while Es-sat ruled.  Go now to your crops and
your hunting. I leave to search for Pan-at-lee. Ab-on will be gund
while I am away--look to him for guidance and to me for an accounting
when I return--and may Jad-ben-Otho smile upon you."

He turned toward Tarzan and the Ho-don. "And you, my friends," he said,
"are free to go among my people; the cave of my ancestors is yours, do
what you will."

"I," said Tarzan, "will go with Om-at to search for Pan-at-lee."

"And I," said Ta-den.

Om-at smiled. "Good!" he exclaimed. "And when we have found her we
shall go together upon Tarzan's business and Ta-den's. Where first
shall we search?" He turned toward his warriors. "Who knows where she
may be?"

None knew other than that Pan-at-lee had gone to her cave with the
others the previous evening--there was no clew, no suggestion as to her
whereabouts.

"Show me where she sleeps," said Tarzan; "let me see something that
belongs to her--an article of her apparel--then, doubtless, I can help
you."

Two young warriors climbed closer to the ledge upon which Om-at stood.
They were In-sad and O-dan. It was the latter who spoke.

"Gund of Kor-ul-JA," he said, "we would go with you to search for
Pan-at-lee."

It was the first acknowledgment of Om-at's chieftainship and
immediately following it the tenseness that had prevailed seemed to
relax--the warriors spoke aloud instead of in whispers, and the women
appeared from the mouths of caves as with the passing of a sudden
storm. In-sad and O-dan had taken the lead and now all seemed glad to
follow. Some came to talk with Om-at and to look more closely at
Tarzan; others, heads of caves, gathered their hunters and discussed
the business of the day. The women and children prepared to descend to
the fields with the youths and the old men, whose duty it was to guard
them.

"O-dan and In-sad shall go with us," announced Om-at, "we shall not
need more. Tarzan, come with me and I shall show you where Pan-at-lee
sleeps, though why you should wish to know I cannot guess--she is not
there. I have looked for myself."

The two entered the cave where Om-at led the way to the apartment in
which Es-sat had surprised Pan-at-lee the previous night.

"All here are hers," said Om-at, "except the war club lying on the
floor--that was Es-sat's."

The ape-man moved silently about the apartment, the quivering of his
sensitive nostrils scarcely apparent to his companion who only wondered
what good purpose could be served here and chafed at the delay.

"Come!" said the ape-man, presently, and led the way toward the outer
recess.

Here their three companions were awaiting them. Tarzan passed to the
left side of the niche and examined the pegs that lay within reach. He
looked at them but it was not his eyes that were examining them. Keener
than his keen eyes was that marvelously trained sense of scent that had
first been developed in him during infancy under the tutorage of his
foster mother, Kala, the she-ape, and further sharpened in the grim
jungles by that master teacher--the instinct of self-preservation.

From the left side of the niche he turned to the right. Om-at was
becoming impatient.

"Let us be off," he said. "We must search for Pan-at-lee if we would
ever find her."

"Where shall we search?" asked Tarzan.

Om-at scratched his head. "Where?" he repeated. "Why all Pal-ul-don, if
necessary."

"A large job," said Tarzan. "Come," he added, "she went this way," and
he took to the pegs that led aloft toward the summit of the cliff. Here
he followed the scent easily since none had passed that way since
Pan-at-lee had fled. At the point at which she had left the permanent
pegs and resorted to those carried with her Tarzan came to an abrupt
halt. "She went this way to the summit," he called back to Om-at who
was directly behind him; "but there are no pegs here."

"I do not know how you know that she went this way," said Om-at; "but
we will get pegs. In-sad, return and fetch climbing pegs for five."

The young warrior was soon back and the pegs distributed. Om-at handed
five to Tarzan and explained their use. The ape-man returned one. "I
need but four," he said.

Om-at smiled. "What a wonderful creature you would be if you were not
deformed," he said, glancing with pride at his own strong tail.

"I admit that I am handicapped," replied Tarzan. "You others go ahead
and leave the pegs in place for me. I am afraid that otherwise it will
be slow work as I cannot hold the pegs in my toes as you do."

"All right," agreed Om-at; "Ta-den, In-sad, and I will go first, you
follow and O-dan bring up the rear and collect the pegs--we cannot
leave them here for our enemies."

"Can't your enemies bring their own pegs?" asked Tarzan.

"Yes; but it delays them and makes easier our defense and--they do not
know which of all the holes you see are deep enough for pegs--the
others are made to confuse our enemies and are too shallow to hold a
peg."

At the top of the cliff beside the gnarled tree Tarzan again took up
the trail. Here the scent was fully as strong as upon the pegs and the
ape-man moved rapidly across the ridge in the direction of the
Kor-ul-lul.

Presently he paused and turned toward Om-at. "Here she moved swiftly,
running at top speed, and, Om-at, she was pursued by a lion."

"You can read that in the grass?" asked O-dan as the others gathered
about the ape-man.

Tarzan nodded. "I do not think the lion got her," he added; "but that
we shall determine quickly. No, he did not get her--look!" and he
pointed toward the southwest, down the ridge.

Following the direction indicated by his finger, the others presently
detected a movement in some bushes a couple of hundred yards away.

"What is it?" asked Om-at. "It is she?" and he started toward the spot.

"Wait," advised Tarzan. "It is the lion which pursued her."

"You can see him?" asked Ta-den.

"No, I can smell him."

The others looked their astonishment and incredulity; but of the fact
that it was indeed a lion they were not left long in doubt. Presently
the bushes parted and the creature stepped out in full view, facing
them. It was a magnificent beast, large and beautifully maned, with the
brilliant leopard spots of its kind well marked and symmetrical. For a
moment it eyed them and then, still chafing at the loss of its prey
earlier in the morning, it charged.

The Pal-ul-donians unslung their clubs and stood waiting the onrushing
beast. Tarzan of the Apes drew his hunting knife and crouched in the
path of the fanged fury. It was almost upon him when it swerved to the
right and leaped for Om-at only to be sent to earth with a staggering
blow upon the head. Almost instantly it was up and though the men
rushed fearlessly in, it managed to sweep aside their weapons with its
mighty paws. A single blow wrenched O-dan's club from his hand and sent
it hurtling against Ta-den, knocking him from his feet. Taking
advantage of its opportunity the lion rose to throw itself upon O-dan
and at the same instant Tarzan flung himself upon its back. Strong,
white teeth buried themselves in the spotted neck, mighty arms
encircled the savage throat and the sinewy legs of the ape-man locked
themselves about the gaunt belly.

The others, powerless to aid, stood breathlessly about as the great
lion lunged hither and thither, clawing and biting fearfully and
futilely at the savage creature that had fastened itself upon him. Over
and over they rolled and now the onlookers saw a brown hand raised
above the lion's side--a brown hand grasping a keen blade. They saw it
fall and rise and fall again--each time with terrific force and in its
wake they saw a crimson stream trickling down JA's gorgeous coat.

Now from the lion's throat rose hideous screams of hate and rage and
pain as he redoubled his efforts to dislodge and punish his tormentor;
but always the tousled black head remained half buried in the dark
brown mane and the mighty arm rose and fell to plunge the knife again
and again into the dying beast.

The Pal-ul-donians stood in mute wonder and admiration. Brave men and
mighty hunters they were and as such the first to accord honor to a
mightier.

"And you would have had me slay him!" cried Om-at, glancing at In-sad
and O-dan.

"Jad-ben-Otho reward you that you did not," breathed In-sad.

And now the lion lunged suddenly to earth and with a few spasmodic
quiverings lay still. The ape-man rose and shook himself, even as might
JA, the leopard-coated lion of Pal-ul-don, had he been the one to
survive.

O-dan advanced quickly toward Tarzan. Placing a palm upon his own
breast and the other on Tarzan's, "Tarzan the Terrible," he said, "I
ask no greater honor than your friendship."

"And I no more than the friendship of Om-at's friends," replied the
ape-man simply, returning the other's salute.

"Do you think," asked Om-at, coming close to Tarzan and laying a hand
upon the other's shoulder, "that he got her?"

"No, my friend; it was a hungry lion that charged us."

"You seem to know much of lions," said In-sad.

"Had I a brother I could not know him better," replied Tarzan.

"Then where can she be?" continued Om-at.

"We can but follow while the spoor is fresh," answered the ape-man and
again taking up his interrupted tracking he led them down the ridge and
at a sharp turning of the trail to the left brought them to the verge
of the cliff that dropped into the Kor-ul-lul. For a moment Tarzan
examined the ground to the right and to the left, then he stood erect
and looking at Om-at pointed into the gorge.

For a moment the Waz-don gazed down into the green rift at the bottom
of which a tumultuous river tumbled downward along its rocky bed, then
he closed his eyes as to a sudden spasm of pain and turned away.

"You--mean--she jumped?" he asked.

"To escape the lion," replied Tarzan. "He was right behind her--look,
you can see where his four paws left their impress in the turf as he
checked his charge upon the very verge of the abyss."

"Is there any chance--" commenced Om-at, to be suddenly silenced by a
warning gesture from Tarzan.

"Down!" whispered the ape-man, "many men are coming. They are
running--from down the ridge." He flattened himself upon his belly in
the grass, the others following his example.

For some minutes they waited thus and then the others, too, heard the
sound of running feet and now a hoarse shout followed by many more.

"It is the war cry of the Kor-ul-lul," whispered Om-at--"the hunting
cry of men who hunt men. Presently shall we see them and if
Jad-ben-Otho is pleased with us they shall not too greatly outnumber
us."

"They are many," said Tarzan, "forty or fifty, I should say; but how
many are the pursued and how many the pursuers we cannot even guess,
except that the latter must greatly outnumber the former, else these
would not run so fast."

"Here they come," said Ta-den.

"It is An-un, father of Pan-at-lee, and his two sons," exclaimed O-dan.
"They will pass without seeing us if we do not hurry," he added looking
at Om-at, the chief, for a sign.

"Come!" cried the latter, springing to his feet and running rapidly to
intercept the three fugitives. The others followed him.

"Five friends!" shouted Om-at as An-un and his sons discovered them.

"Adenen yo!" echoed O-dan and In-sad.

The fugitives scarcely paused as these unexpected reinforcements joined
them but they eyed Ta-den and Tarzan with puzzled glances.

"The Kor-ul-lul are many," shouted An-un. "Would that we might pause
and fight; but first we must warn Es-sat and our people."

"Yes," said Om-at, "we must warn our people."

"Es-sat is dead," said In-sad.

"Who is chief?" asked one of An-un's sons.

"Om-at," replied O-dan.

"It is well," cried An-un. "Pan-at-lee said that you would come back
and slay Es-sat."

Now the enemy broke into sight behind them.

"Come!" cried Tarzan, "let us turn and charge them, raising a great
cry. They pursued but three and when they see eight charging upon them
they will think that many men have come to do battle. They will believe
that there are more even than they see and then one who is swift will
have time to reach the gorge and warn your people."

"It is well," said Om-at. "Id-an, you are swift--carry word to the
warriors of Kor-ul-JA that we fight the Kor-ul-lul upon the ridge and
that Ab-on shall send a hundred men."

Id-an, the son of An-un, sped swiftly toward the cliff-dwellings of the
Kor-ul-JA while the others charged the oncoming Kor-ul-lul, the war
cries of the two tribes rising and falling in a certain grim harmony.
The leaders of the Kor-ul-lul paused at sight of the reinforcements,
waiting apparently for those behind to catch up with them and,
possibly, also to learn how great a force confronted them. The leaders,
swifter runners than their fellows, perhaps, were far in advance while
the balance of their number had not yet emerged from the brush; and now
as Om-at and his companions fell upon them with a ferocity born of
necessity they fell back, so that when their companions at last came in
sight of them they appeared to be in full rout. The natural result was
that the others turned and fled.

Encouraged by this first success Om-at followed them into the brush,
his little company charging valiantly upon his either side, and loud
and terrifying were the savage yells with which they pursued the
fleeing enemy. The brush, while not growing so closely together as to
impede progress, was of such height as to hide the members of the party
from one another when they became separated by even a few yards. The
result was that Tarzan, always swift and always keen for battle, was
soon pursuing the enemy far in the lead of the others--a lack of
prudence which was to prove his undoing.

The warriors of Kor-ul-lul, doubtless as valorous as their foemen,
retreated only to a more strategic position in the brush, nor were they
long in guessing that the number of their pursuers was fewer than their
own. They made a stand then where the brush was densest--an ambush it
was, and into this ran Tarzan of the Apes. They tricked him neatly.
Yes, sad as is the narration of it, they tricked the wily jungle lord.
But then they were fighting on their own ground, every foot of which
they knew as you know your front parlor, and they were following their
own tactics, of which Tarzan knew nothing.

A single black warrior appeared to Tarzan a laggard in the rear of the
retreating enemy and thus retreating he lured Tarzan on.  At last he
turned at bay confronting the ape-man with bludgeon and drawn knife and
as Tarzan charged him a score of burly Waz-don leaped from the
surrounding brush. Instantly, but too late, the giant Tarmangani
realized his peril. There flashed before him a vision of his lost mate
and a great and sickening regret surged through him with the
realization that if she still lived she might no longer hope, for
though she might never know of the passing of her lord the fact of it
must inevitably seal her doom.

And consequent to this thought there enveloped him a blind frenzy of
hatred for these creatures who dared thwart his purpose and menace the
welfare of his wife. With a savage growl he threw himself upon the
warrior before him twisting the heavy club from the creature's hand as
if he had been a little child, and with his left fist backed by the
weight and sinew of his giant frame, he crashed a shattering blow to
the center of the Waz-don's face--a blow that crushed the bones and
dropped the fellow in his tracks. Then he swung upon the others with
their fallen comrade's bludgeon striking to right and left mighty,
unmerciful blows that drove down their own weapons until that wielded
by the ape-man was splintered and shattered. On either hand they fell
before his cudgel; so rapid the delivery of his blows, so catlike his
recovery that in the first few moments of the battle he seemed
invulnerable to their attack; but it could not last--he was outnumbered
twenty to one and his undoing came from a thrown club. It struck him
upon the back of the head. For a moment he stood swaying and then like
a great pine beneath the woodsman's ax he crashed to earth.

Others of the Kor-ul-lul had rushed to engage the balance of Om-at's
party. They could be heard fighting at a short distance and it was
evident that the Kor-ul-JA were falling slowly back and as they fell
Om-at called to the missing one: "Tarzan the Terrible! Tarzan the
Terrible!"

"Jad-guru, indeed," repeated one of the Kor-ul-lul rising from where
Tarzan had dropped him. "Tarzan-jad-guru! He was worse than that."



5

In the Kor-ul-GRYF

As Tarzan fell among his enemies a man halted many miles away upon the
outer verge of the morass that encircles Pal-ul-don.  Naked he was
except for a loin cloth and three belts of cartridges, two of which
passed over his shoulders, crossing upon his chest and back, while the
third encircled his waist. Slung to his back by its leathern
sling-strap was an Enfield, and he carried too a long knife, a bow and
a quiver of arrows. He had come far, through wild and savage lands,
menaced by fierce beasts and fiercer men, yet intact to the last
cartridge was the ammunition that had filled his belts the day that he
set out.

The bow and the arrows and the long knife had brought him thus far
safely, yet often in the face of great risks that could have been
minimized by a single shot from the well-kept rifle at his back. What
purpose might he have for conserving this precious ammunition? in
risking his life to bring the last bright shining missile to his
unknown goal? For what, for whom were these death-dealing bits of metal
preserved? In all the world only he knew.

When Pan-at-lee stepped over the edge of the cliff above Kor-ul-lul she
expected to be dashed to instant death upon the rocks below; but she
had chosen this in preference to the rending fangs of JA. Instead,
chance had ordained that she make the frightful plunge at a point where
the tumbling river swung close beneath the overhanging cliff to eddy
for a slow moment in a deep pool before plunging madly downward again
in a cataract of boiling foam, and water thundering against rocks.

Into this icy pool the girl shot, and down and down beneath the watery
surface until, half choked, yet fighting bravely, she battled her way
once more to air. Swimming strongly she made the opposite shore and
there dragged herself out upon the bank to lie panting and spent until
the approaching dawn warned her to seek concealment, for she was in the
country of her people's enemies.

Rising, she moved into the concealment of the rank vegetation that
grows so riotously in the well-watered kors[1] of Pal-ul-don.

Hidden amidst the plant life from the sight of any who might chance to
pass along the well-beaten trail that skirted the river Pan-at-lee
sought rest and food, the latter growing in abundance all about her in
the form of fruits and berries and succulent tubers which she scooped
from the earth with the knife of the dead Es-sat.

Ah! if she had but known that he was dead! What trials and risks and
terrors she might have been saved; but she thought that he still lived
and so she dared not return to Kor-ul-JA. At least not yet while his
rage was at white heat. Later, perhaps, her father and brothers
returned to their cave, she might risk it; but not now--not now. Nor
could she for long remain here in the neighborhood of the hostile
Kor-ul-lul and somewhere she must find safety from beasts before the
night set in.

As she sat upon the bole of a fallen tree seeking some solution of the
problem of existence that confronted her, there broke upon her ears
from up the gorge the voices of shouting men--a sound that she
recognized all too well. It was the war cry of the Kor-ul-lul. Closer
and closer it approached her hiding place.  Then, through the veil of
foliage she caught glimpses of three figures fleeing along the trail,
and behind them the shouting of the pursuers rose louder and louder as
they neared her. Again she caught sight of the fugitives crossing the
river below the cataract and again they were lost to sight. And now the
pursuers came into view--shouting Kor-ul-lul warriors, fierce and
implacable. Forty, perhaps fifty of them. She waited breathless; but
they did not swerve from the trail and passed her, unguessing that an
enemy she lay hid within a few yards of them.

Once again she caught sight of the pursued--three Waz-don warriors
clambering the cliff face at a point where portions of the summit had
fallen away presenting a steep slope that might be ascended by such as
these. Suddenly her attention was riveted upon the three. Could it be?
O Jad-ben-Otho! had she but known a moment before. When they passed she
might have joined them, for they were her father and two brothers. Now
it was too late. With bated breath and tense muscles she watched the
race. Would they reach the summit? Would the Kor-ul-lul overhaul them?
They climbed well, but, oh, so slowly. Now one lost his footing in the
loose shale and slipped back! The Kor-ul-lul were ascending--one hurled
his club at the nearest fugitive. The Great God was pleased with the
brother of Pan-at-lee, for he caused the club to fall short of its
target, and to fall, rolling and bounding, back upon its owner carrying
him from his feet and precipitating him to the bottom of the gorge.

Standing now, her hands pressed tight above her golden breastplates,
Pan-at-lee watched the race for life. Now one, her older brother,
reached the summit and clinging there to something that she could not
see he lowered his body and his long tail to the father beneath him.
The latter, seizing this support, extended his own tail to the son
below--the one who had slipped back--and thus, upon a living ladder of
their own making, the three reached the summit and disappeared from
view before the Kor-ul-lul overtook them. But the latter did not
abandon the chase. On they went until they too had disappeared from
sight and only a faint shouting came down to Pan-at-lee to tell her
that the pursuit continued.

The girl knew that she must move on. At any moment now might come a
hunting party, combing the gorge for the smaller animals that fed or
bedded there.

Behind her were Es-sat and the returning party of Kor-ul-lul that had
pursued her kin; before her, across the next ridge, was the
Kor-ul-GRYF, the lair of the terrifying monsters that brought the chill
of fear to every inhabitant of Pal-ul-don; below her, in the valley,
was the country of the Ho-don, where she could look for only slavery,
or death; here were the Kor-ul-lul, the ancient enemies of her people
and everywhere were the wild beasts that eat the flesh of man.

For but a moment she debated and then turning her face toward the
southeast she set out across the gorge of water toward the
Kor-ul-GRYF--at least there were no men there. As it is now, so it was
in the beginning, back to the primitive progenitor of man which is
typified by Pan-at-lee and her kind today, of all the hunters that
woman fears, man is the most relentless, the most terrible. To the
dangers of man she preferred the dangers of the GRYF.

Moving cautiously she reached the foot of the cliff at the far side of
Kor-ul-lul and here, toward noon, she found a comparatively easy
ascent. Crossing the ridge she stood at last upon the brink of
Kor-ul-GRYF--the horror place of the folklore of her race. Dank and
mysterious grew the vegetation below; giant trees waved their plumed
tops almost level with the summit of the cliff; and over all brooded an
ominous silence.

Pan-at-lee lay upon her belly and stretching over the edge scanned the
cliff face below her. She could see caves there and the stone pegs
which the ancients had fashioned so laboriously by hand. She had heard
of these in the firelight tales of her childhood and of how the gryfs
had come from the morasses across the mountains and of how at last the
people had fled after many had been seized and devoured by the hideous
creatures, leaving their caves untenanted for no man living knew how
long. Some said that Jad-ben-Otho, who has lived forever, was still a
little boy.  Pan-at-lee shuddered; but there were caves and in them she
would be safe even from the gryfs.

She found a place where the stone pegs reached to the very summit of
the cliff, left there no doubt in the final exodus of the tribe when
there was no longer need of safeguarding the deserted caves against
invasion. Pan-at-lee clambered slowly down toward the uppermost cave.
She found the recess in front of the doorway almost identical with
those of her own tribe. The floor of it, though, was littered with
twigs and old nests and the droppings of birds, until it was half
choked. She moved along to another recess and still another, but all
were alike in the accumulated filth. Evidently there was no need in
looking further. This one seemed large and commodious. With her knife
she fell to work cleaning away the debris by the simple expedient of
pushing it over the edge, and always her eyes turned constantly toward
the silent gorge where lurked the fearsome creatures of Pal-ul-don. And
other eyes there were, eyes she did not see, but that saw her and
watched her every move--fierce eyes, greedy eyes, cunning and cruel.
They watched her, and a red tongue licked flabby, pendulous lips. They
watched her, and a half-human brain laboriously evolved a brutish
design.

As in her own Kor-ul-JA, the natural springs in the cliff had been
developed by the long-dead builders of the caves so that fresh, pure
water trickled now, as it had for ages, within easy access to the cave
entrances. Her only difficulty would be in procuring food and for that
she must take the risk at least once in two days, for she was sure that
she could find fruits and tubers and perhaps small animals, birds, and
eggs near the foot of the cliff, the last two, possibly, in the caves
themselves.  Thus might she live on here indefinitely. She felt now a
certain sense of security imparted doubtless by the impregnability of
her high-flung sanctuary that she knew to be safe from all the more
dangerous beasts, and this one from men, too, since it lay in the
abjured Kor-ul-GRYF.

Now she determined to inspect the interior of her new home. The sun
still in the south, lighted the interior of the first apartment. It was
similar to those of her experience--the same beasts and men were
depicted in the same crude fashion in the carvings on the
walls--evidently there had been little progress in the race of Waz-don
during the generations that had come and departed since Kor-ul-GRYF had
been abandoned by men. Of course Pan-at-lee thought no such thoughts,
for evolution and progress existed not for her, or her kind. Things
were as they had always been and would always be as they were.

That these strange creatures have existed thus for incalculable ages it
can scarce be doubted, so marked are the indications of antiquity about
their dwellings--deep furrows worn by naked feet in living rock; the
hollow in the jamb of a stone doorway where many arms have touched in
passing; the endless carvings that cover, ofttimes, the entire face of
a great cliff and all the walls and ceilings of every cave and each
carving wrought by a different hand, for each is the coat of arms, one
might say, of the adult male who traced it.

And so Pan-at-lee found this ancient cave homelike and familiar. There
was less litter within than she had found without and what there was
was mostly an accumulation of dust. Beside the doorway was the niche in
which wood and tinder were kept, but there remained nothing now other
than mere dust. She had however saved a little pile of twigs from the
debris on the porch. In a short time she had made a light by firing a
bundle of twigs and lighting others from this fire she explored some of
the inner rooms. Nor here did she find aught that was new or strange
nor any relic of the departed owners other than a few broken stone
dishes. She had been looking for something soft to sleep upon, but was
doomed to disappointment as the former owners had evidently made a
leisurely departure, carrying all their belongings with them. Below, in
the gorge were leaves and grasses and fragrant branches, but Pan-at-lee
felt no stomach for descending into that horrid abyss for the
gratification of mere creature comfort--only the necessity for food
would drive her there.

And so, as the shadows lengthened and night approached she prepared to
make as comfortable a bed as she could by gathering the dust of ages
into a little pile and spreading it between her soft body and the hard
floor--at best it was only better than nothing. But Pan-at-lee was very
tired. She had not slept since two nights before and in the interval
she had experienced many dangers and hardships. What wonder then that
despite the hard bed, she was asleep almost immediately she had
composed herself for rest.

She slept and the moon rose, casting its silver light upon the cliff's
white face and lessening the gloom of the dark forest and the dismal
gorge. In the distance a lion roared. There was a long silence. From
the upper reaches of the gorge came a deep bellow. There was a movement
in the trees at the cliff's foot. Again the bellow, low and ominous. It
was answered from below the deserted village. Something dropped from
the foliage of a tree directly below the cave in which Pan-at-lee
slept--it dropped to the ground among the dense shadows. Now it moved,
cautiously. It moved toward the foot of the cliff, taking form and
shape in the moonlight. It moved like the creature of a bad
dream--slowly, sluggishly. It might have been a huge sloth--it might
have been a man, with so grotesque a brush does the moon paint--master
cubist.

Slowly it moved up the face of the cliff--like a great grubworm it
moved, but now the moon-brush touched it again and it had hands and
feet and with them it clung to the stone pegs and raised itself
laboriously aloft toward the cave where Pan-at-lee slept. From the
lower reaches of the gorge came again the sound of bellowing, and it
was answered from above the village.

Tarzan of the Apes opened his eyes. He was conscious of a pain in his
head, and at first that was about all. A moment later grotesque
shadows, rising and falling, focused his arousing perceptions.
Presently he saw that he was in a cave. A dozen Waz-don warriors
squatted about, talking. A rude stone cresset containing burning oil
lighted the interior and as the flame rose and fell the exaggerated
shadows of the warriors danced upon the walls behind them.

"We brought him to you alive, Gund," he heard one of them saying,
"because never before was Ho-don like him seen. He has no tail--he was
born without one, for there is no scar to mark where a tail had been
cut off. The thumbs upon his hands and feet are unlike those of the
races of Pal-ul-don. He is more powerful than many men put together and
he attacks with the fearlessness of JA.  We brought him alive, that you
might see him before he is slain."

The chief rose and approached the ape-man, who closed his eyes and
feigned unconsciousness. He felt hairy hands upon him as he was turned
over, none too gently. The gund examined him from head to foot, making
comments, especially upon the shape and size of his thumbs and great
toes.

"With these and with no tail," he said, "it cannot climb."

"No," agreed one of the warriors, "it would surely fall even from the
cliff pegs."

"I have never seen a thing like it," said the chief. "It is neither
Waz-don nor Ho-don. I wonder from whence it came and what it is called."

"The Kor-ul-JA shouted aloud, 'Tarzan-jad-guru!' and we thought that
they might be calling this one," said a warrior. "Shall we kill it now?"

"No," replied the chief, "we will wait until its life returns into its
head that I may question it. Remain here, In-tan, and watch it. When it
can again hear and speak call me."

He turned and departed from the cave, the others, except In-tan,
following him. As they moved past him and out of the chamber Tarzan
caught snatches of their conversation which indicated that the
Kor-ul-JA reinforcements had fallen upon their little party in great
numbers and driven them away. Evidently the swift feet of Id-an had
saved the day for the warriors of Om-at. The ape-man smiled, then he
partially opened an eye and cast it upon In-tan. The warrior stood at
the entrance to the cave looking out--his back was toward his prisoner.
Tarzan tested the bonds that secured his wrists. They seemed none too
stout and they had tied his hands in front of him! Evidence indeed that
the Waz-don took few prisoners--if any.

Cautiously he raised his wrists until he could examine the thongs that
confined them. A grim smile lighted his features. Instantly he was at
work upon the bonds with his strong teeth, but ever a wary eye was upon
In-tan, the warrior of Kor-ul-lul. The last knot had been loosened and
Tarzan's hands were free when In-tan turned to cast an appraising eye
upon his ward. He saw that the prisoner's position was changed--he no
longer lay upon his back as they had left him, but upon his side and
his hands were drawn up against his face. In-tan came closer and bent
down. The bonds seemed very loose upon the prisoner's wrists. He
extended his hand to examine them with his fingers and instantly the
two hands leaped from their bonds--one to seize his own wrist, the
other his throat. So unexpected the catlike attack that In-tan had not
even time to cry out before steel fingers silenced him. The creature
pulled him suddenly forward so that he lost his balance and rolled over
upon the prisoner and to the floor beyond to stop with Tarzan upon his
breast. In-tan struggled to release himself--struggled to draw his
knife; but Tarzan found it before him. The Waz-don's tail leaped to the
other's throat, encircling it--he too could choke; but his own knife,
in the hands of his antagonist, severed the beloved member close to its
root.

The Waz-don's struggles became weaker--a film was obscuring his vision.
He knew that he was dying and he was right. A moment later he was dead.
Tarzan rose to his feet and placed one foot upon the breast of his dead
foe. How the urge seized him to roar forth the victory cry of his kind!
But he dared not. He discovered that they had not removed his rope from
his shoulders and that they had replaced his knife in its sheath. It
had been in his hand when he was felled. Strange creatures! He did not
know that they held a superstitious fear of the weapons of a dead
enemy, believing that if buried without them he would forever haunt his
slayers in search of them and that when he found them he would kill the
man who killed him. Against the wall leaned his bow and quiver of
arrows.

Tarzan stepped toward the doorway of the cave and looked out. Night had
just fallen. He could hear voices from the nearer caves and there
floated to his nostrils the odor of cooking food. He looked down and
experienced a sensation of relief. The cave in which he had been held
was in the lowest tier--scarce thirty feet from the base of the cliff.
He was about to chance an immediate descent when there occurred to him
a thought that brought a grin to his savage lips--a thought that was
born of the name the Waz-don had given him--Tarzan-jad-guru--Tarzan the
Terrible--and a recollection of the days when he had delighted in
baiting the blacks of the distant jungle of his birth. He turned back
into the cave where lay the dead body of In-tan. With his knife he
severed the warrior's head and carrying it to the outer edge of the
recess tossed it to the ground below, then he dropped swiftly and
silently down the ladder of pegs in a way that would have surprised the
Kor-ul-lul who had been so sure that he could not climb.

At the bottom he picked up the head of In-tan and disappeared among the
shadows of the trees carrying the grisly trophy by its shock of shaggy
hair. Horrible? But you are judging a wild beast by the standards of
civilization. You may teach a lion tricks, but he is still a lion.
Tarzan looked well in a Tuxedo, but he was still a Tarmangani and
beneath his pleated shirt beat a wild and savage heart.

Nor was his madness lacking in method. He knew that the hearts of the
Kor-ul-lul would be filled with rage when they discovered the thing
that he had done and he knew too, that mixed with the rage would be a
leaven of fear and it was fear of him that had made Tarzan master of
many jungles--one does not win the respect of the killers with bonbons.

Below the village Tarzan returned to the foot of the cliff searching
for a point where he could make the ascent to the ridge and thus back
to the village of Om-at, the Kor-ul-JA. He came at last to a place
where the river ran so close to the rocky wall that he was forced to
swim it in search of a trail upon the opposite side and here it was
that his keen nostrils detected a familiar spoor. It was the scent of
Pan-at-lee at the spot where she had emerged from the pool and taken to
the safety of the jungle.

Immediately the ape-man's plans were changed. Pan-at-lee lived, or at
least she had lived after the leap from the cliff's summit. He had
started in search of her for Om-at, his friend, and for Om-at he would
continue upon the trail he had picked up thus fortuitously by accident.
It led him into the jungle and across the gorge and then to the point
at which Pan-at-lee had commenced the ascent of the opposite cliffs.
Here Tarzan abandoned the head of In-tan, tying it to the lower branch
of a tree, for he knew that it would handicap him in his ascent of the
steep escarpment.  Apelike he ascended, following easily the scent
spoor of Pan-at-lee. Over the summit and across the ridge the trail
lay, plain as a printed page to the delicate senses of the jungle-bred
tracker.

Tarzan knew naught of the Kor-ul-GRYF. He had seen, dimly in the
shadows of the night, strange, monstrous forms and Ta-den and Om-at had
spoken of great creatures that all men feared; but always, everywhere,
by night and by day, there were dangers. From infancy death had
stalked, grim and terrible, at his heels. He knew little of any other
existence. To cope with danger was his life and he lived his life as
simply and as naturally as you live yours amidst the dangers of the
crowded city streets. The black man who goes abroad in the jungle by
night is afraid, for he has spent his life since infancy surrounded by
numbers of his own kind and safeguarded, especially at night, by such
crude means as lie within his powers. But Tarzan had lived as the lion
lives and the panther and the elephant and the ape--a true jungle
creature dependent solely upon his prowess and his wits, playing a lone
hand against creation. Therefore he was surprised at nothing and feared
nothing and so he walked through the strange night as undisturbed and
unapprehensive as the farmer to the cow lot in the darkness before the
dawn.

Once more Pan-at-lee's trail ended at the verge of a cliff; but this
time there was no indication that she had leaped over the edge and a
moment's search revealed to Tarzan the stone pegs upon which she had
made her descent. As he lay upon his belly leaning over the top of the
cliff examining the pegs his attention was suddenly attracted by
something at the foot of the cliff. He could not distinguish its
identity, but he saw that it moved and presently that it was ascending
slowly, apparently by means of pegs similar to those directly below
him. He watched it intently as it rose higher and higher until he was
able to distinguish its form more clearly, with the result that he
became convinced that it more nearly resembled some form of great ape
than a lower order. It had a tail, though, and in other respects it did
not seem a true ape.

Slowly it ascended to the upper tier of caves, into one of which it
disappeared. Then Tarzan took up again the trail of Pan-at-lee. He
followed it down the stone pegs to the nearest cave and then further
along the upper tier. The ape-man raised his eyebrows when he saw the
direction in which it led, and quickened his pace. He had almost
reached the third cave when the echoes of Kor-ul-GRYF were awakened by
a shrill scream of terror.


[1] I have used the Pal-ul-don word for gorge with the English plural,
which is not the correct native plural form. The latter, it seems to
me, is awkward for us and so I have generally ignored it throughout my
manuscript, permitting, for example, Kor-ul-JA to answer for both
singular and plural. However, for the benefit of those who may be
interested in such things I may say that the plurals are formed simply
for all words in the Pal-ul-don language by doubling the initial letter
of the word, as k'kor, gorges, pronounced as though written kakor, the
a having the sound of a in sofa. Lions, d' don.



6

The Tor-o-don

Pan-at-lee slept--the troubled sleep, of physical and nervous
exhaustion, filled with weird dreamings. She dreamed that she slept
beneath a great tree in the bottom of the Kor-ul-GRYF and that one of
the fearsome beasts was creeping upon her but she could not open her
eyes nor move. She tried to scream but no sound issued from her lips.
She felt the thing touch her throat, her breast, her arm, and there it
closed and seemed to be dragging her toward it. With a super-human
effort of will she opened her eyes. In the instant she knew that she
was dreaming and that quickly the hallucination of the dream would
fade--it had happened to her many times before. But it persisted. In
the dim light that filtered into the dark chamber she saw a form beside
her, she felt hairy fingers upon her and a hairy breast against which
she was being drawn. Jad-ben-Otho! this was no dream. And then she
screamed and tried to fight the thing from her; but her scream was
answered by a low growl and another hairy hand seized her by the hair
of the head. The beast rose now upon its hind legs and dragged her from
the cave to the moonlit recess without and at the same instant she saw
the figure of what she took to be a Ho-don rise above the outer edge of
the niche.

The beast that held her saw it too and growled ominously but it did not
relinquish its hold upon her hair. It crouched as though waiting an
attack, and it increased the volume and frequency of its growls until
the horrid sounds reverberated through the gorge, drowning even the
deep bellowings of the beasts below, whose mighty thunderings had
broken out anew with the sudden commotion from the high-flung cave. The
beast that held her crouched and the creature that faced it crouched
also, and growled--as hideously as the other. Pan-at-lee trembled. This
was no Ho-don and though she feared the Ho-don she feared this thing
more, with its catlike crouch and its beastly growls. She was
lost--that Pan-at-lee knew. The two things might fight for her, but
whichever won she was lost. Perhaps, during the battle, if it came to
that, she might find the opportunity to throw herself over into the
Kor-ul-GRYF.

The thing that held her she had recognized now as a Tor-o-don, but the
other thing she could not place, though in the moonlight she could see
it very distinctly. It had no tail. She could see its hands and its
feet, and they were not the hands and feet of the races of Pal-ul-don.
It was slowly closing upon the Tor-o-don and in one hand it held a
gleaming knife. Now it spoke and to Pan-at-lee's terror was added an
equal weight of consternation.

"When it leaves go of you," it said, "as it will presently to defend
itself, run quickly behind me, Pan-at-lee, and go to the cave nearest
the pegs you descended from the cliff top. Watch from there. If I am
defeated you will have time to escape this slow thing; if I am not I
will come to you there. I am Om-at's friend and yours."

The last words took the keen edge from Pan-at-lee's terror; but she did
not understand. How did this strange creature know her name? How did it
know that she had descended the pegs by a certain cave? It must, then,
have been here when she came.  Pan-at-lee was puzzled.

"Who are you?" she asked, "and from whence do you come?"

"I am Tarzan," he replied, "and just now I came from Om-at, of
Kor-ul-JA, in search of you."

Om-at, gund of Kor-ul-JA! What wild talk was this? She would have
questioned him further, but now he was approaching the Tor-o-don and
the latter was screaming and growling so loudly as to drown the sound
of her voice. And then it did what the strange creature had said that
it would do--it released its hold upon her hair as it prepared to
charge. Charge it did and in those close quarters there was no room to
fence for openings. Instantly the two beasts locked in deadly embrace,
each seeking the other's throat.  Pan-at-lee watched, taking no
advantage of the opportunity to escape which their preoccupation gave
her. She watched and waited, for into her savage little brain had come
the resolve to pin her faith to this strange creature who had unlocked
her heart with those four words--"I am Om-at's friend!" And so she
waited, with drawn knife, the opportunity to do her bit in the
vanquishing of the Tor-o-don. That the newcomer could do it unaided she
well knew to be beyond the realms of possibility, for she knew well the
prowess of the beastlike man with whom it fought. There were not many
of them in Pal-ul-don, but what few there were were a terror to the
women of the Waz-don and the Ho-don, for the old Tor-o-don bulls roamed
the mountains and the valleys of Pal-ul-don between rutting seasons and
woe betide the women who fell in their paths.

With his tail the Tor-o-don sought one of Tarzan's ankles, and finding
it, tripped him. The two fell heavily, but so agile was the ape-man and
so quick his powerful muscles that even in falling he twisted the beast
beneath him, so that Tarzan fell on top and now the tail that had
tripped him sought his throat as had the tail of In-tan, the
Kor-ul-lul. In the effort of turning his antagonist's body during the
fall Tarzan had had to relinquish his knife that he might seize the
shaggy body with both hands and now the weapon lay out of reach at the
very edge of the recess.  Both hands were occupied for the moment in
fending off the clutching fingers that sought to seize him and drag his
throat within reach of his foe's formidable fangs and now the tail was
seeking its deadly hold with a formidable persistence that would not be
denied.

Pan-at-lee hovered about, breathless, her dagger ready, but there was
no opening that did not also endanger Tarzan, so constantly were the
two duelists changing their positions. Tarzan felt the tail slowly but
surely insinuating itself about his neck though he had drawn his head
down between the muscles of his shoulders in an effort to protect this
vulnerable part. The battle seemed to be going against him for the
giant beast against which he strove would have been a fair match in
weight and strength for Bolgani, the gorilla. And knowing this he
suddenly exerted a single super-human effort, thrust far apart the
giant hands and with the swiftness of a striking snake buried his fangs
in the jugular of the Tor-o-don. At the same instant the creature's
tail coiled about his own throat and then commenced a battle royal of
turning and twisting bodies as each sought to dislodge the fatal hold
of the other, but the acts of the ape-man were guided by a human brain
and thus it was that the rolling bodies rolled in the direction that
Tarzan wished--toward the edge of the recess.

The choking tail had shut the air from his lungs, he knew that his
gasping lips were parted and his tongue protruding; and now his brain
reeled and his sight grew dim; but not before he reached his goal and a
quick hand shot out to seize the knife that now lay within reach as the
two bodies tottered perilously upon the brink of the chasm.

With all his remaining strength the ape-man drove home the blade--once,
twice, thrice, and then all went black before him as he felt himself,
still in the clutches of the Tor-o-don, topple from the recess.

Fortunate it was for Tarzan that Pan-at-lee had not obeyed his
injunction to make good her escape while he engaged the Tor-o-don, for
it was to this fact that he owed his life. Close beside the struggling
forms during the brief moments of the terrific climax she had realized
every detail of the danger to Tarzan with which the emergency was
fraught and as she saw the two rolling over the outer edge of the niche
she seized the ape-man by an ankle at the same time throwing herself
prone upon the rocky floor. The muscles of the Tor-o-don relaxed in
death with the last thrust of Tarzan's knife and with its hold upon the
ape-man released it shot from sight into the gorge below.

It was with infinite difficulty that Pan-at-lee retained her hold upon
the ankle of her protector, but she did so and then, slowly, she sought
to drag the dead weight back to the safety of the niche. This, however,
was beyond her strength and she could but hold on tightly, hoping that
some plan would suggest itself before her powers of endurance failed.
She wondered if, after all, the creature was already dead, but that she
could not bring herself to believe--and if not dead how long it would
be before he regained consciousness. If he did not regain it soon he
never would regain it, that she knew, for she felt her fingers numbing
to the strain upon them and slipping, slowly, slowly, from their hold.
It was then that Tarzan regained consciousness. He could not know what
power upheld him, but he felt that whatever it was it was slowly
releasing its hold upon his ankle. Within easy reach of his hands were
two pegs and these he seized upon just as Pan-at-lee's fingers slipped
from their hold.

As it was he came near to being precipitated into the gorge--only his
great strength saved him. He was upright now and his feet found other
pegs. His first thought was of his foe. Where was he? Waiting above
there to finish him? Tarzan looked up just as the frightened face of
Pan-at-lee appeared over the threshold of the recess.

"You live?" she cried.

"Yes," replied Tarzan. "Where is the shaggy one?"

Pan-at-lee pointed downward. "There," she said, "dead."

"Good!" exclaimed the ape-man, clambering to her side. "You are
unharmed?" he asked.

"You came just in time," replied Pan-at-lee; "but who are you and how
did you know that I was here and what do you know of Om-at and where
did you come from and what did you mean by calling Om-at, gund?"

"Wait, wait," cried Tarzan; "one at a time. My, but you are all
alike--the shes of the tribe of Kerchak, the ladies of England, and
their sisters of Pal-ul-don. Have patience and I will try to tell you
all that you wish to know. Four of us set out with Om-at from Kor-ul-JA
to search for you. We were attacked by the Kor-ul-lul and separated. I
was taken prisoner, but escaped.  Again I stumbled upon your trail and
followed it, reaching the summit of this cliff just as the hairy one
was climbing up after you. I was coming to investigate when I heard
your scream--the rest you know."

"But you called Om-at, gund of Kor-ul-JA," she insisted. "Es-sat is
gund."

"Es-sat is dead," explained the ape-man. "Om-at slew him and now Om-at
is gund. Om-at came back seeking you. He found Es-sat in your cave and
killed him."

"Yes," said the girl, "Es-sat came to my cave and I struck him down
with my golden breastplates and escaped."

"And a lion pursued you," continued Tarzan, "and you leaped from the
cliff into Kor-ul-lul, but why you were not killed is beyond me."

"Is there anything beyond you?" exclaimed Pan-at-lee. "How could you
know that a lion pursued me and that I leaped from the cliff and not
know that it was the pool of deep water below that saved me?"

"I would have known that, too, had not the Kor-ul-lul come then and
prevented me continuing upon your trail. But now I would ask you a
question--by what name do you call the thing with which I just fought?"

"It was a Tor-o-don," she replied. "I have seen but one before.  They
are terrible creatures with the cunning of man and the ferocity of a
beast. Great indeed must be the warrior who slays one single-handed."
She gazed at him in open admiration.

"And now," said Tarzan, "you must sleep, for tomorrow we shall return
to Kor-ul-JA and Om-at, and I doubt that you have had much rest these
two nights."

Pan-at-lee, lulled by a feeling of security, slept peacefully into the
morning while Tarzan stretched himself upon the hard floor of the
recess just outside her cave.

The sun was high in the heavens when he awoke; for two hours it had
looked down upon another heroic figure miles away--the figure of a
godlike man fighting his way through the hideous morass that lies like
a filthy moat defending Pal-ul-don from the creatures of the outer
world. Now waist deep in the sucking ooze, now menaced by loathsome
reptiles, the man advanced only by virtue of Herculean efforts gaining
laboriously by inches along the devious way that he was forced to
choose in selecting the least precarious footing. Near the center of
the morass was open water--slimy, green-hued water. He reached it at
last after more than two hours of such effort as would have left an
ordinary man spent and dying in the sticky mud, yet he was less than
halfway across the marsh. Greasy with slime and mud was his smooth,
brown hide, and greasy with slime and mud was his beloved Enfield that
had shone so brightly in the first rays of the rising sun.

He paused a moment upon the edge of the open water and then throwing
himself forward struck out to swim across. He swam with long, easy,
powerful strokes calculated less for speed than for endurance, for his
was, primarily, a test of the latter, since beyond the open water was
another two hours or more of gruelling effort between it and solid
ground. He was, perhaps, halfway across and congratulating himself upon
the ease of the achievement of this portion of his task when there
arose from the depths directly in his path a hideous reptile, which,
with wide-distended jaws, bore down upon him, hissing shrilly.

Tarzan arose and stretched, expanded his great chest and drank in deep
draughts of the fresh morning air. His clear eyes scanned the wondrous
beauties of the landscape spread out before them.  Directly below lay
Kor-ul-GRYF, a dense, somber green of gently moving tree tops. To
Tarzan it was neither grim, nor forbidding--it was jungle, beloved
jungle. To his right there spread a panorama of the lower reaches of
the Valley of Jad-ben-Otho, with its winding streams and its blue
lakes.  Gleaming whitely in the sunlight were scattered groups of
dwellings--the feudal strongholds of the lesser chiefs of the Ho-don.
A-lur, the City of Light, he could not see as it was hidden by the
shoulder of the cliff in which the deserted village lay.

For a moment Tarzan gave himself over to that spiritual enjoyment of
beauty that only the man-mind may attain and then Nature asserted
herself and the belly of the beast called aloud that it was hungry.
Again Tarzan looked down at Kor-ul-GRYF. There was the jungle! Grew
there a jungle that would not feed Tarzan? The ape-man smiled and
commenced the descent to the gorge. Was there danger there? Of course.
Who knew it better than Tarzan? In all jungles lies death, for life and
death go hand in hand and where life teems death reaps his fullest
harvest. Never had Tarzan met a creature of the jungle with which he
could not cope--sometimes by virtue of brute strength alone, again by a
combination of brute strength and the cunning of the man-mind; but
Tarzan had never met a GRYF.

He had heard the bellowings in the gorge the night before after he had
lain down to sleep and he had meant to ask Pan-at-lee this morning what
manner of beast so disturbed the slumbers of its betters. He reached
the foot of the cliff and strode into the jungle and here he halted,
his keen eyes and ears watchful and alert, his sensitive nostrils
searching each shifting air current for the scent spoor of game. Again
he advanced deeper into the wood, his light step giving forth no sound,
his bow and arrows in readiness. A light morning breeze was blowing
from up the gorge and in this direction he bent his steps. Many odors
impinged upon his organs of scent. Some of these he classified without
effort, but others were strange--the odors of beasts and of birds, of
trees and shrubs and flowers with which he was unfamiliar. He sensed
faintly the reptilian odor that he had learned to connect with the
strange, nocturnal forms that had loomed dim and bulky on several
occasions since his introduction to Pal-ul-don.

And then, suddenly he caught plainly the strong, sweet odor of Bara,
the deer. Were the belly vocal, Tarzan's would have given a little cry
of joy, for it loved the flesh of Bara. The ape-man moved rapidly, but
cautiously forward. The prey was not far distant and as the hunter
approached it, he took silently to the trees and still in his nostrils
was the faint reptilian odor that spoke of a great creature which he
had never yet seen except as a denser shadow among the dense shadows of
the night; but the odor was of such a faintness as suggests to the
jungle bred the distance of absolute safety.

And now, moving noiselessly, Tarzan came within sight of Bara drinking
at a pool where the stream that waters Kor-ul-GRYF crosses an open
place in the jungle. The deer was too far from the nearest tree to risk
a charge, so the ape-man must depend upon the accuracy and force of his
first arrow, which must drop the deer in its tracks or forfeit both
deer and shaft. Far back came the right hand and the bow, that you or I
might not move, bent easily beneath the muscles of the forest god.
There was a singing twang and Bara, leaping high in air, collapsed upon
the ground, an arrow through his heart. Tarzan dropped to earth and ran
to his kill, lest the animal might even yet rise and escape; but Bara
was safely dead. As Tarzan stooped to lift it to his shoulder there
fell upon his ears a thunderous bellow that seemed almost at his right
elbow, and as his eyes shot in the direction of the sound, there broke
upon his vision such a creature as paleontologists have dreamed as
having possibly existed in the dimmest vistas of Earth's infancy--a
gigantic creature, vibrant with mad rage, that charged, bellowing, upon
him.

When Pan-at-lee awoke she looked out upon the niche in search of
Tarzan. He was not there. She sprang to her feet and rushed out,
looking down into Kor-ul-GRYF guessing that he had gone down in search
of food and there she caught a glimpse of him disappearing into the
forest. For an instant she was panic-stricken. She knew that he was a
stranger in Pal-ul-don and that, so, he might not realize the dangers
that lay in that gorge of terror. Why did she not call to him to
return? You or I might have done so, but no Pal-ul-don, for they know
the ways of the GRYF--they know the weak eyes and the keen ears, and
that at the sound of a human voice they come. To have called to Tarzan,
then, would but have been to invite disaster and so she did not call.
Instead, afraid though she was, she descended into the gorge for the
purpose of overhauling Tarzan and warning him in whispers of his
danger. It was a brave act, since it was performed in the face of
countless ages of inherited fear of the creatures that she might be
called upon to face. Men have been decorated for less.

Pan-at-lee, descended from a long line of hunters, assumed that Tarzan
would move up wind and in this direction she sought his tracks, which
she soon found well marked, since he had made no effort to conceal
them. She moved rapidly until she reached the point at which Tarzan had
taken to the trees. Of course she knew what had happened; since her own
people were semi-arboreal; but she could not track him through the
trees, having no such well-developed sense of scent as he.

She could but hope that he had continued on up wind and in this
direction she moved, her heart pounding in terror against her ribs, her
eyes glancing first in one direction and then another.  She had reached
the edge of a clearing when two things happened--she caught sight of
Tarzan bending over a dead deer and at the same instant a deafening
roar sounded almost beside her.  It terrified her beyond description,
but it brought no paralysis of fear. Instead it galvanized her into
instant action with the result that Pan-at-lee swarmed up the nearest
tree to the very loftiest branch that would sustain her weight. Then
she looked down.

The thing that Tarzan saw charging him when the warning bellow
attracted his surprised eyes loomed terrifically monstrous before
him--monstrous and awe-inspiring; but it did not terrify Tarzan, it
only angered him, for he saw that it was beyond even his powers to
combat and that meant that it might cause him to lose his kill, and
Tarzan was hungry. There was but a single alternative to remaining for
annihilation and that was flight--swift and immediate. And Tarzan fled,
but he carried the carcass of Bara, the deer, with him. He had not more
than a dozen paces start, but on the other hand the nearest tree was
almost as close. His greatest danger lay, he imagined, in the great,
towering height of the creature pursuing him, for even though he
reached the tree he would have to climb high in an incredibly short
time as, unless appearances were deceiving, the thing could reach up
and pluck him down from any branch under thirty feet above the ground,
and possibly from those up to fifty feet, if it reared up on its hind
legs.

But Tarzan was no sluggard and though the GRYF was incredibly fast
despite its great bulk, it was no match for Tarzan, and when it comes
to climbing, the little monkeys gaze with envy upon the feats of the
ape-man. And so it was that the bellowing GRYF came to a baffled stop
at the foot of the tree and even though he reared up and sought to
seize his prey among the branches, as Tarzan had guessed he might, he
failed in this also. And then, well out of reach, Tarzan came to a stop
and there, just above him, he saw Pan-at-lee sitting, wide-eyed and
trembling.

"How came you here?" he asked.

She told him. "You came to warn me!" he said. "It was very brave and
unselfish of you. I am chagrined that I should have been thus
surprised. The creature was up wind from me and yet I did not sense its
near presence until it charged. I cannot understand it."

"It is not strange," said Pan-at-lee. "That is one of the peculiarities
of the GRYF--it is said that man never knows of its presence until it
is upon him--so silently does it move despite its great size."

"But I should have smelled it," cried Tarzan, disgustedly.

"Smelled it!" ejaculated Pan-at-lee. "Smelled it?"

"Certainly. How do you suppose I found this deer so quickly? And I
sensed the GRYF, too, but faintly as at a great distance." Tarzan
suddenly ceased speaking and looked down at the bellowing creature
below them--his nostrils quivered as though searching for a scent.
"Ah!" he exclaimed. "I have it!"

"What?" asked Pan-at-lee.

"I was deceived because the creature gives off practically no odor,"
explained the ape-man. "What I smelled was the faint aroma that
doubtless permeates the entire jungle because of the long presence of
many of the creatures--it is the sort of odor that would remain for a
long time, faint as it is.

"Pan-at-lee, did you ever hear of a triceratops? No? Well this thing
that you call a GRYF is a triceratops and it has been extinct for
hundreds of thousands of years. I have seen its skeleton in the museum
in London and a figure of one restored. I always thought that the
scientists who did such work depended principally upon an overwrought
imagination, but I see that I was wrong. This living thing is not an
exact counterpart of the restoration that I saw; but it is so similar
as to be easily recognizable, and then, too, we must remember that
during the ages that have elapsed since the paleontologist's specimen
lived many changes might have been wrought by evolution in the living
line that has quite evidently persisted in Pal-ul-don."

"Triceratops, London, paleo--I don't know what you are talking about,"
cried Pan-at-lee.

Tarzan smiled and threw a piece of dead wood at the face of the angry
creature below them. Instantly the great bony hood over the neck was
erected and a mad bellow rolled upward from the gigantic body. Full
twenty feet at the shoulder the thing stood, a dirty slate-blue in
color except for its yellow face with the blue bands encircling the
eyes, the red hood with the yellow lining and the yellow belly. The
three parallel lines of bony protuberances down the back gave a further
touch of color to the body, those following the line of the spine being
red, while those on either side are yellow. The five- and three-toed
hoofs of the ancient horned dinosaurs had become talons in the GRYF,
but the three horns, two large ones above the eyes and a median horn on
the nose, had persisted through all the ages. Weird and terrible as was
its appearance Tarzan could not but admire the mighty creature looming
big below him, its seventy-five feet of length majestically typifying
those things which all his life the ape-man had admired--courage and
strength. In that massive tail alone was the strength of an elephant.

The wicked little eyes looked up at him and the horny beak opened to
disclose a full set of powerful teeth.

"Herbivorous!" murmured the ape-man. "Your ancestors may have been, but
not you," and then to Pan-at-lee: "Let us go now. At the cave we will
have deer meat and then--back to Kor-ul-JA and Om-at."

The girl shuddered. "Go?" she repeated. "We will never go from here."

"Why not?" asked Tarzan.

For answer she but pointed to the GRYF.

"Nonsense!" exclaimed the man. "It cannot climb. We can reach the cliff
through the trees and be back in the cave before it knows what has
become of us."

"You do not know the GRYF," replied Pan-at-lee gloomily.

"Wherever we go it will follow and always it will be ready at the foot
of each tree when we would descend. It will never give us up."

"We can live in the trees for a long time if necessary," replied
Tarzan, "and sometime the thing will leave."

The girl shook her head. "Never," she said, "and then there are the
Tor-o-don. They will come and kill us and after eating a little will
throw the balance to the GRYF--the GRYF and Tor-o-don are friends,
because the Tor-o-don shares his food with the GRYF."

"You may be right," said Tarzan; "but even so I don't intend waiting
here for someone to come along and eat part of me and then feed the
balance to that beast below. If I don't get out of this place whole it
won't be my fault. Come along now and we'll make a try at it," and so
saying he moved off through the tree tops with Pan-at-lee close behind.
Below them, on the ground, moved the horned dinosaur and when they
reached the edge of the forest where there lay fifty yards of open
ground to cross to the foot of the cliff he was there with them, at the
bottom of the tree, waiting.

Tarzan looked ruefully down and scratched his head.



7

Jungle Craft

Presently he looked up and at Pan-at-lee. "Can you cross the gorge
through the trees very rapidly?" he questioned.

"Alone?" she asked.

"No," replied Tarzan.

"I can follow wherever you can lead," she said then.

"Across and back again?"

"Yes."

"Then come, and do exactly as I bid." He started back again through the
trees, swiftly, swinging monkey-like from limb to limb, following a
zigzag course that he tried to select with an eye for the difficulties
of the trail beneath. Where the underbrush was heaviest, where fallen
trees blocked the way, he led the footsteps of the creature below them;
but all to no avail. When they reached the opposite side of the gorge
the GRYF was with them.

"Back again," said Tarzan, and, turning, the two retraced their
high-flung way through the upper terraces of the ancient forest of
Kor-ul-GRYF. But the result was the same--no, not quite; it was worse,
for another GRYF had joined the first and now two waited beneath the
tree in which they stopped.

The cliff looming high above them with its innumerable cave mouths
seemed to beckon and to taunt them. It was so near, yet eternity yawned
between. The body of the Tor-o-don lay at the cliff's foot where it had
fallen. It was in plain view of the two in the tree. One of the gryfs
walked over and sniffed about it, but did not offer to devour it.
Tarzan had examined it casually as he had passed earlier in the
morning. He guessed that it represented either a very high order of ape
or a very low order of man--something akin to the Java man, perhaps; a
truer example of the pithecanthropi than either the Ho-don or the
Waz-don; possibly the precursor of them both. As his eyes wandered idly
over the scene below his active brain was working out the details of
the plan that he had made to permit Pan-at-lee's escape from the gorge.
His thoughts were interrupted by a strange cry from above them in the
gorge.

"Whee-oo! Whee-oo!" it sounded, coming closer.

The gryfs below raised their heads and looked in the direction of the
interruption. One of them made a low, rumbling sound in its throat. It
was not a bellow and it did not indicate anger.  Immediately the
"Whee-oo!" responded. The gryfs repeated the rumbling and at intervals
the "Whee-oo!" was repeated, coming ever closer.

Tarzan looked at Pan-at-lee. "What is it?" he asked.

"I do not know," she replied. "Perhaps a strange bird, or another
horrid beast that dwells in this frightful place."

"Ah," exclaimed Tarzan; "there it is. Look!"

Pan-at-lee voiced a cry of despair. "A Tor-o-don!"

The creature, walking erect and carrying a stick in one hand, advanced
at a slow, lumbering gait. It walked directly toward the gryfs who
moved aside, as though afraid. Tarzan watched intently. The Tor-o-don
was now quite close to one of the triceratops. It swung its head and
snapped at him viciously. Instantly the Tor-o-don sprang in and
commenced to belabor the huge beast across the face with his stick. To
the ape-man's amazement the GRYF, that might have annihilated the
comparatively puny Tor-o-don instantly in any of a dozen ways, cringed
like a whipped cur.

"Whee-oo! Whee-oo!" shouted the Tor-o-don and the GRYF came slowly
toward him. A whack on the median horn brought it to a stop. Then the
Tor-o-don walked around behind it, clambered up its tail and seated
himself astraddle of the huge back.  "Whee-oo!" he shouted and prodded
the beast with a sharp point of his stick. The GRYF commenced to move
off.

So rapt had Tarzan been in the scene below him that he had given no
thought to escape, for he realized that for him and Pan-at-lee time had
in these brief moments turned back countless ages to spread before
their eyes a page of the dim and distant past. They two had looked upon
the first man and his primitive beasts of burden.

And now the ridden GRYF halted and looked up at them, bellowing. It was
sufficient. The creature had warned its master of their presence.
Instantly the Tor-o-don urged the beast close beneath the tree which
held them, at the same time leaping to his feet upon the horny back.
Tarzan saw the bestial face, the great fangs, the mighty muscles. From
the loins of such had sprung the human race--and only from such could
it have sprung, for only such as this might have survived the horrid
dangers of the age that was theirs.

The Tor-o-don beat upon his breast and growled horribly--hideous,
uncouth, beastly. Tarzan rose to his full height upon a swaying
branch--straight and beautiful as a demigod--unspoiled by the taint of
civilization--a perfect specimen of what the human race might have been
had the laws of man not interfered with the laws of nature.

The Present fitted an arrow to his bow and drew the shaft far back. The
Past basing its claims upon brute strength sought to reach the other
and drag him down; but the loosed arrow sank deep into the savage heart
and the Past sank back into the oblivion that had claimed his kind.

"Tarzan-jad-guru!" murmured Pan-at-lee, unknowingly giving him out of
the fullness of her admiration the same title that the warriors of her
tribe had bestowed upon him.

The ape-man turned to her. "Pan-at-lee," he said, "these beasts may
keep us treed here indefinitely. I doubt if we can escape together, but
I have a plan. You remain here, hiding yourself in the foliage, while I
start back across the gorge in sight of them and yelling to attract
their attention. Unless they have more brains than I suspect they will
follow me. When they are gone you make for the cliff. Wait for me in
the cave not longer than today. If I do not come by tomorrow's sun you
will have to start back for Kor-ul-JA alone. Here is a joint of deer
meat for you." He had severed one of the deer's hind legs and this he
passed up to her.

"I cannot desert you," she said simply; "it is not the way of my people
to desert a friend and ally. Om-at would never forgive me."

"Tell Om-at that I commanded you to go," replied Tarzan.

"It is a command?" she asked.

"It is! Good-bye, Pan-at-lee. Hasten back to Om-at--you are a fitting
mate for the chief of Kor-ul-JA." He moved off slowly through the trees.

"Good-bye, Tarzan-jad-guru!" she called after him. "Fortunate are my
Om-at and his Pan-at-lee in owning such a friend."

Tarzan, shouting aloud, continued upon his way and the great gryfs,
lured by his voice, followed beneath. His ruse was evidently proving
successful and he was filled with elation as he led the bellowing
beasts farther and farther from Pan-at-lee. He hoped that she would
take advantage of the opportunity afforded her for escape, yet at the
same time he was filled with concern as to her ability to survive the
dangers which lay between Kor-ul-GRYF and Kor-ul-JA. There were lions
and Tor-o-dons and the unfriendly tribe of Kor-ul-lul to hinder her
progress, though the distance in itself to the cliffs of her people was
not great.

He realized her bravery and understood the resourcefulness that she
must share in common with all primitive people who, day by day, must
contend face to face with nature's law of the survival of the fittest,
unaided by any of the numerous artificial protections that civilization
has thrown around its brood of weaklings.

Several times during this crossing of the gorge Tarzan endeavored to
outwit his keen pursuers, but all to no avail. Double as he would he
could not throw them off his track and ever as he changed his course
they changed theirs to conform. Along the verge of the forest upon the
southeastern side of the gorge he sought some point at which the trees
touched some negotiable portion of the cliff, but though he traveled
far both up and down the gorge he discovered no such easy avenue of
escape. The ape-man finally commenced to entertain an idea of the
hopelessness of his case and to realize to the full why the Kor-ul-GRYF
had been religiously abjured by the races of Pal-ul-don for all these
many ages.

Night was falling and though since early morning he had sought
diligently a way out of this cul-de-sac he was no nearer to liberty
than at the moment the first bellowing GRYF had charged him as he
stooped over the carcass of his kill: but with the falling of night
came renewed hope for, in common with the great cats, Tarzan was, to a
greater or lesser extent, a nocturnal beast. It is true he could not
see by night as well as they, but that lack was largely recompensed for
by the keenness of his scent and the highly developed sensitiveness of
his other organs of perception. As the blind follow and interpret their
Braille characters with deft fingers, so Tarzan reads the book of the
jungle with feet and hands and eyes and ears and nose; each
contributing its share to the quick and accurate translation of the
text.

But again he was doomed to be thwarted by one vital weakness--he did
not know the GRYF, and before the night was over he wondered if the
things never slept, for wheresoever he moved they moved also, and
always they barred his road to liberty. Finally, just before dawn, he
relinquished his immediate effort and sought rest in a friendly tree
crotch in the safety of the middle terrace.

Once again was the sun high when Tarzan awoke, rested and refreshed.
Keen to the necessities of the moment he made no effort to locate his
jailers lest in the act he might apprise them of his movements. Instead
he sought cautiously and silently to melt away among the foliage of the
trees. His first move, however, was heralded by a deep bellow from
below.

Among the numerous refinements of civilization that Tarzan had failed
to acquire was that of profanity, and possibly it is to be regretted
since there are circumstances under which it is at least a relief to
pent emotion. And it may be that in effect Tarzan resorted to profanity
if there can be physical as well as vocal swearing, since immediately
the bellow announced that his hopes had been again frustrated, he
turned quickly and seeing the hideous face of the GRYF below him seized
a large fruit from a nearby branch and hurled it viciously at the
horned snout. The missile struck full between the creature's eyes,
resulting in a reaction that surprised the ape-man; it did not arouse
the beast to a show of revengeful rage as Tarzan had expected and
hoped; instead the creature gave a single vicious side snap at the
fruit as it bounded from his skull and then turned sulkily away,
walking off a few steps.

There was that in the act that recalled immediately to Tarzan's mind
similar action on the preceding day when the Tor-o-don had struck one
of the creatures across the face with his staff, and instantly there
sprung to the cunning and courageous brain a plan of escape from his
predicament that might have blanched the cheek of the most heroic.

The gambling instinct is not strong among creatures of the wild; the
chances of their daily life are sufficient stimuli for the beneficial
excitement of their nerve centers. It has remained for civilized man,
protected in a measure from the natural dangers of existence, to invent
artificial stimulants in the form of cards and dice and roulette
wheels. Yet when necessity bids there are no greater gamblers than the
savage denizens of the jungle, the forest, and the hills, for as
lightly as you roll the ivory cubes upon the green cloth they will
gamble with death--their own lives the stake.

And so Tarzan would gamble now, pitting the seemingly wild deductions
of his shrewd brain against all the proofs of the bestial ferocity of
his antagonists that his experience of them had adduced--against all
the age-old folklore and legend that had been handed down for countless
generations and passed on to him through the lips of Pan-at-lee.

Yet as he worked in preparation for the greatest play that man can make
in the game of life, he smiled; nor was there any indication of haste
or excitement or nervousness in his demeanor.

First he selected a long, straight branch about two inches in diameter
at its base. This he cut from the tree with his knife, removed the
smaller branches and twigs until he had fashioned a pole about ten feet
in length. This he sharpened at the smaller end. The staff finished to
his satisfaction he looked down upon the triceratops.

"Whee-oo!" he cried.

Instantly the beasts raised their heads and looked at him. From the
throat of one of them came faintly a low rumbling sound.

"Whee-oo!" repeated Tarzan and hurled the balance of the carcass of the
deer to them.

Instantly the gryfs fell upon it with much bellowing, one of them
attempting to seize it and keep it from the other: but finally the
second obtained a hold and an instant later it had been torn asunder
and greedily devoured. Once again they looked up at the ape-man and
this time they saw him descending to the ground.

One of them started toward him. Again Tarzan repeated the weird cry of
the Tor-o-don. The GRYF halted in his track, apparently puzzled, while
Tarzan slipped lightly to the earth and advanced toward the nearer
beast, his staff raised menacingly and the call of the first-man upon
his lips.

Would the cry be answered by the low rumbling of the beast of burden or
the horrid bellow of the man-eater? Upon the answer to this question
hung the fate of the ape-man.

Pan-at-lee was listening intently to the sounds of the departing gryfs
as Tarzan led them cunningly from her, and when she was sure that they
were far enough away to insure her safe retreat she dropped swiftly
from the branches to the ground and sped like a frightened deer across
the open space to the foot of the cliff, stepped over the body of the
Tor-o-don who had attacked her the night before and was soon climbing
rapidly up the ancient stone pegs of the deserted cliff village. In the
mouth of the cave near that which she had occupied she kindled a fire
and cooked the haunch of venison that Tarzan had left her, and from one
of the trickling streams that ran down the face of the escarpment she
obtained water to satisfy her thirst.

All day she waited, hearing in the distance, and sometimes close at
hand, the bellowing of the gryfs which pursued the strange creature
that had dropped so miraculously into her life. For him she felt the
same keen, almost fanatical loyalty that many another had experienced
for Tarzan of the Apes. Beast and human, he had held them to him with
bonds that were stronger than steel--those of them that were clean and
courageous, and the weak and the helpless; but never could Tarzan claim
among his admirers the coward, the ingrate or the scoundrel; from such,
both man and beast, he had won fear and hatred.

To Pan-at-lee he was all that was brave and noble and heroic and, too,
he was Om-at's friend--the friend of the man she loved. For any one of
these reasons Pan-at-lee would have died for Tarzan, for such is the
loyalty of the simple-minded children of nature. It has remained for
civilization to teach us to weigh the relative rewards of loyalty and
its antithesis. The loyalty of the primitive is spontaneous,
unreasoning, unselfish and such was the loyalty of Pan-at-lee for the
Tarmangani.

And so it was that she waited that day and night, hoping that he would
return that she might accompany him back to Om-at, for her experience
had taught her that in the face of danger two have a better chance than
one. But Tarzan-jad-guru had not come, and so upon the following
morning Pan-at-lee set out upon her return to Kor-ul-JA.

She knew the dangers and yet she faced them with the stolid
indifference of her race. When they directly confronted and menaced her
would be time enough to experience fear or excitement or confidence. In
the meantime it was unnecessary to waste nerve energy by anticipating
them. She moved therefore through her savage land with no greater show
of concern than might mark your sauntering to a corner drug-store for a
sundae. But this is your life and that is Pan-at-lee's and even now as
you read this Pan-at-lee may be sitting upon the edge of the recess of
Om-at's cave while the JA and JATO roar from the gorge below and from
the ridge above, and the Kor-ul-lul threaten upon the south and the
Ho-don from the Valley of Jad-ben-Otho far below, for Pan-at-lee still
lives and preens her silky coat of jet beneath the tropical moonlight
of Pal-ul-don.

But she was not to reach Kor-ul-JA this day, nor the next, nor for many
days after though the danger that threatened her was neither Waz-don
enemy nor savage beast.

She came without misadventure to the Kor-ul-lul and after descending
its rocky southern wall without catching the slightest glimpse of the
hereditary enemies of her people, she experienced a renewal of
confidence that was little short of practical assurance that she would
successfully terminate her venture and be restored once more to her own
people and the lover she had not seen for so many long and weary moons.

She was almost across the gorge now and moving with an extreme caution
abated no wit by her confidence, for wariness is an instinctive trait
of the primitive, something which cannot be laid aside even momentarily
if one would survive. And so she came to the trail that follows the
windings of Kor-ul-lul from its uppermost reaches down into the broad
and fertile Valley of Jad-ben-Otho.

And as she stepped into the trail there arose on either side of her
from out of the bushes that border the path, as though materialized
from thin air, a score of tall, white warriors of the Ho-don. Like a
frightened deer Pan-at-lee cast a single startled look at these
menacers of her freedom and leaped quickly toward the bushes in an
effort to escape; but the warriors were too close at hand. They closed
upon her from every side and then, drawing her knife she turned at bay,
metamorphosed by the fires of fear and hate from a startled deer to a
raging tiger-cat. They did not try to kill her, but only to subdue and
capture her; and so it was that more than a single Ho-don warrior felt
the keen edge of her blade in his flesh before they had succeeded in
overpowering her by numbers. And still she fought and scratched and bit
after they had taken the knife from her until it was necessary to tie
her hands and fasten a piece of wood between her teeth by means of
thongs passed behind her head.

At first she refused to walk when they started off in the direction of
the valley but after two of them had seized her by the hair and dragged
her for a number of yards she thought better of her original decision
and came along with them, though still as defiant as her bound wrists
and gagged mouth would permit.

Near the entrance to Kor-ul-lul they came upon another body of their
warriors with which were several Waz-don prisoners from the tribe of
Kor-ul-lul. It was a raiding party come up from a Ho-don city of the
valley after slaves. This Pan-at-lee knew for the occurrence was by no
means unusual. During her lifetime the tribe to which she belonged had
been sufficiently fortunate, or powerful, to withstand successfully the
majority of such raids made upon them, but yet Pan-at-lee had known of
friends and relatives who had been carried into slavery by the Ho-don
and she knew, too, another thing which gave her hope, as doubtless it
did to each of the other captives--that occasionally the prisoners
escaped from the cities of the hairless whites.

After they had joined the other party the entire band set forth into
the valley and presently, from the conversation of her captors,
Pan-at-lee knew that she was headed for A-lur, the City of Light; while
in the cave of his ancestors, Om-at, chief of the Kor-ul-JA, bemoaned
the loss of both his friend and she that was to have been his mate.



8

A-lur

As the hissing reptile bore down upon the stranger swimming in the open
water near the center of the morass on the frontier of Pal-ul-don it
seemed to the man that this indeed must be the futile termination of an
arduous and danger-filled journey. It seemed, too, equally futile to
pit his puny knife against this frightful creature. Had he been
attacked on land it is possible that he might as a last resort have
used his Enfield, though he had come thus far through all these weary,
danger-ridden miles without recourse to it, though again and again had
his life hung in the balance in the face of the savage denizens of
forest, jungle, and steppe. For whatever it may have been for which he
was preserving his precious ammunition he evidently held it more sacred
even than his life, for as yet he had not used a single round and now
the decision was not required of him, since it would have been
impossible for him to have unslung his Enfield, loaded and fired with
the necessary celerity while swimming.

Though his chance for survival seemed slender, and hope at its lowest
ebb, he was not minded therefore to give up without a struggle. Instead
he drew his blade and awaited the oncoming reptile. The creature was
like no living thing he ever before had seen although possibly it
resembled a crocodile in some respects more than it did anything with
which he was familiar.

As this frightful survivor of some extinct progenitor charged upon him
with distended jaws there came to the man quickly a full consciousness
of the futility of endeavoring to stay the mad rush or pierce the
armor-coated hide with his little knife. The thing was almost upon him
now and whatever form of defense he chose must be made quickly. There
seemed but a single alternative to instant death, and this he took at
almost the instant the great reptile towered directly above him.

With the celerity of a seal he dove headforemost beneath the oncoming
body and at the same instant, turning upon his back, he plunged his
blade into the soft, cold surface of the slimy belly as the momentum of
the hurtling reptile carried it swiftly over him; and then with
powerful strokes he swam on beneath the surface for a dozen yards
before he rose. A glance showed him the stricken monster plunging madly
in pain and rage upon the surface of the water behind him. That it was
writhing in its death agonies was evidenced by the fact that it made no
effort to pursue him, and so, to the accompaniment of the shrill
screaming of the dying monster, the man won at last to the farther edge
of the open water to take up once more the almost superhuman effort of
crossing the last stretch of clinging mud which separated him from the
solid ground of Pal-ul-don.

A good two hours it took him to drag his now weary body through the
clinging, stinking muck, but at last, mud covered and spent, he dragged
himself out upon the soft grasses of the bank. A hundred yards away a
stream, winding its way down from the distant mountains, emptied into
the morass, and, after a short rest, he made his way to this and
seeking a quiet pool, bathed himself and washed the mud and slime from
his weapons, accouterments, and loin cloth. Another hour was spent
beneath the rays of the hot sun in wiping, polishing, and oiling his
Enfield though the means at hand for drying it consisted principally of
dry grasses. It was afternoon before he had satisfied himself that his
precious weapon was safe from any harm by dirt, or dampness, and then
he arose and took up the search for the spoor he had followed to the
opposite side of the swamp.

Would he find again the trail that had led into the opposite side of
the morass, to be lost there, even to his trained senses? If he found
it not again upon this side of the almost impassable barrier he might
assume that his long journey had ended in failure. And so he sought up
and down the verge of the stagnant water for traces of an old spoor
that would have been invisible to your eyes or mine, even had we
followed directly in the tracks of its maker.

As Tarzan advanced upon the gryfs he imitated as closely as he could
recall them the methods and mannerisms of the Tor-o-don, but up to the
instant that he stood close beside one of the huge creatures he
realized that his fate still hung in the balance, for the thing gave
forth no sign, either menacing or otherwise.  It only stood there,
watching him out of its cold, reptilian eyes and then Tarzan raised his
staff and with a menacing "Whee-oo!" struck the GRYF a vicious blow
across the face.

The creature made a sudden side snap in his direction, a snap that did
not reach him, and then turned sullenly away, precisely as it had when
the Tor-o-don commanded it. Walking around to its rear as he had seen
the shaggy first-man do, Tarzan ran up the broad tail and seated
himself upon the creature's back, and then again imitating the acts of
the Tor-o-don he prodded it with the sharpened point of his staff, and
thus goading it forward and guiding it with blows, first upon one side
and then upon the other, he started it down the gorge in the direction
of the valley.

At first it had been in his mind only to determine if he could
successfully assert any authority over the great monsters, realizing
that in this possibility lay his only hope of immediate escape from his
jailers. But once seated upon the back of his titanic mount the ape-man
experienced the sensation of a new thrill that recalled to him the day
in his boyhood that he had first clambered to the broad head of Tantor,
the elephant, and this, together with the sense of mastery that was
always meat and drink to the lord of the jungle, decided him to put his
newly acquired power to some utilitarian purpose.

Pan-at-lee he judged must either have already reached safety or met
with death. At least, no longer could he be of service to her, while
below Kor-ul-GRYF, in the soft green valley, lay A-lur, the City of
Light, which, since he had gazed upon it from the shoulder of
Pastar-ul-ved, had been his ambition and his goal.

Whether or not its gleaming walls held the secret of his lost mate he
could not even guess but if she lived at all within the precincts of
Pal-ul-don it must be among the Ho-don, since the hairy black men of
this forgotten world took no prisoners. And so to A-lur he would go,
and how more effectively than upon the back of this grim and terrible
creature that the races of Pal-ul-don held in such awe?

A little mountain stream tumbles down from Kor-ul-GRYF to be joined in
the foothills with that which empties the waters of Kor-ul-lul into the
valley, forming a small river which runs southwest, eventually entering
the valley's largest lake at the City of A-lur, through the center of
which the stream passes. An ancient trail, well marked by countless
generations of naked feet of man and beast, leads down toward A-lur
beside the river, and along this Tarzan guided the GRYF. Once clear of
the forest which ran below the mouth of the gorge, Tarzan caught
occasional glimpses of the city gleaming in the distance far below him.

The country through which he passed was resplendent with the riotous
beauties of tropical verdure. Thick, lush grasses grew waist high upon
either side of the trail and the way was broken now and again by
patches of open park-like forest, or perhaps a little patch of dense
jungle where the trees overarched the way and trailing creepers
depended in graceful loops from branch to branch.

At times the ape-man had difficulty in commanding obedience upon the
part of his unruly beast, but always in the end its fear of the
relatively puny goad urged it on to obedience. Late in the afternoon as
they approached the confluence of the stream they were skirting and
another which appeared to come from the direction of Kor-ul-JA the
ape-man, emerging from one of the jungle patches, discovered a
considerable party of Ho-don upon the opposite bank. Simultaneously
they saw him and the mighty creature he bestrode. For a moment they
stood in wide-eyed amazement and then, in answer to the command of
their leader, they turned and bolted for the shelter of the nearby wood.

The ape-man had but a brief glimpse of them but it was sufficient
indication that there were Waz-don with them, doubtless prisoners taken
in one of the raids upon the Waz-don villages of which Ta-den and Om-at
had told him.

At the sound of their voices the GRYF had bellowed terrifically and
started in pursuit even though a river intervened, but by dint of much
prodding and beating, Tarzan had succeeded in heading the animal back
into the path though thereafter for a long time it was sullen and more
intractable than ever.

As the sun dropped nearer the summit of the western hills Tarzan became
aware that his plan to enter A-lur upon the back of a GRYF was likely
doomed to failure, since the stubbornness of the great beast was
increasing momentarily, doubtless due to the fact that its huge belly
was crying out for food. The ape-man wondered if the Tor-o-dons had any
means of picketing their beasts for the night, but as he did not know
and as no plan suggested itself, he determined that he should have to
trust to the chance of finding it again in the morning.

There now arose in his mind a question as to what would be their
relationship when Tarzan had dismounted. Would it again revert to that
of hunter and quarry or would fear of the goad continue to hold its
supremacy over the natural instinct of the hunting flesh-eater? Tarzan
wondered but as he could not remain upon the GRYF forever, and as he
preferred dismounting and putting the matter to a final test while it
was still light, he decided to act at once.

How to stop the creature he did not know, as up to this time his sole
desire had been to urge it forward. By experimenting with his staff,
however, he found that he could bring it to a halt by reaching forward
and striking the thing upon its beaklike snout. Close by grew a number
of leafy trees, in any one of which the ape-man could have found
sanctuary, but it had occurred to him that should he immediately take
to the trees it might suggest to the mind of the GRYF that the creature
that had been commanding him all day feared him, with the result that
Tarzan would once again be held a prisoner by the triceratops.

And so, when the GRYF halted, Tarzan slid to the ground, struck the
creature a careless blow across the flank as though in dismissal and
walked indifferently away. From the throat of the beast came a low
rumbling sound and without even a glance at Tarzan it turned and
entered the river where it stood drinking for a long time.

Convinced that the GRYF no longer constituted a menace to him the
ape-man, spurred on himself by the gnawing of hunger, unslung his bow
and selecting a handful of arrows set forth cautiously in search of
food, evidence of the near presence of which was being borne up to him
by a breeze from down river.

Ten minutes later he had made his kill, again one of the Pal-ul-don
specimens of antelope, all species of which Tarzan had known since
childhood as Bara, the deer, since in the little primer that had been
the basis of his education the picture of a deer had been the nearest
approach to the likeness of the antelope, from the giant eland to the
smaller bushbuck of the hunting grounds of his youth.

Cutting off a haunch he cached it in a nearby tree, and throwing the
balance of the carcass across his shoulder trotted back toward the spot
at which he had left the GRYF. The great beast was just emerging from
the river when Tarzan, seeing it, issued the weird cry of the
Tor-o-don. The creature looked in the direction of the sound voicing at
the same time the low rumble with which it answered the call of its
master. Twice Tarzan repeated his cry before the beast moved slowly
toward him, and when it had come within a few paces he tossed the
carcass of the deer to it, upon which it fell with greedy jaws.

"If anything will keep it within call," mused the ape-man as he
returned to the tree in which he had cached his own portion of his
kill, "it is the knowledge that I will feed it." But as he finished his
repast and settled himself comfortably for the night high among the
swaying branches of his eyrie he had little confidence that he would
ride into A-lur the following day upon his prehistoric steed.

When Tarzan awoke early the following morning he dropped lightly to the
ground and made his way to the stream. Removing his weapons and loin
cloth he entered the cold waters of the little pool, and after his
refreshing bath returned to the tree to breakfast upon another portion
of Bara, the deer, adding to his repast some fruits and berries which
grew in abundance nearby.

His meal over he sought the ground again and raising his voice in the
weird cry that he had learned, he called aloud on the chance of
attracting the GRYF, but though he waited for some time and continued
calling there was no response, and he was finally forced to the
conclusion that he had seen the last of his great mount of the
preceding day.

And so he set his face toward A-lur, pinning his faith upon his
knowledge of the Ho-don tongue, his great strength and his native wit.

Refreshed by food and rest, the journey toward A-lur, made in the cool
of the morning along the bank of the joyous river, he found delightful
in the extreme. Differentiating him from his fellows of the savage
jungle were many characteristics other than those physical and mental.
Not the least of these were in a measure spiritual, and one that had
doubtless been as strong as another in influencing Tarzan's love of the
jungle had been his appreciation of the beauties of nature. The apes
cared more for a grubworm in a rotten log than for all the majestic
grandeur of the forest giants waving above them. The only beauties that
Numa acknowledged were those of his own person as he paraded them
before the admiring eyes of his mate, but in all the manifestations of
the creative power of nature of which Tarzan was cognizant he
appreciated the beauties.

As Tarzan neared the city his interest became centered upon the
architecture of the outlying buildings which were hewn from the
chalklike limestone of what had once been a group of low hills, similar
to the many grass-covered hillocks that dotted the valley in every
direction. Ta-den's explanation of the Ho-don methods of house
construction accounted for the ofttimes remarkable shapes and
proportions of the buildings which, during the ages that must have been
required for their construction, had been hewn from the limestone
hills, the exteriors chiseled to such architectural forms as appealed
to the eyes of the builders while at the same time following roughly
the original outlines of the hills in an evident desire to economize
both labor and space. The excavation of the apartments within had been
similarly governed by necessity.

As he came nearer Tarzan saw that the waste material from these
building operations had been utilized in the construction of outer
walls about each building or group of buildings resulting from a single
hillock, and later he was to learn that it had also been used for the
filling of inequalities between the hills and the forming of paved
streets throughout the city, the result, possibly, more of the adoption
of an easy method of disposing of the quantities of broken limestone
than by any real necessity for pavements.

There were people moving about within the city and upon the narrow
ledges and terraces that broke the lines of the buildings and which
seemed to be a peculiarity of Ho-don architecture, a concession, no
doubt, to some inherent instinct that might be traced back to their
early cliff-dwelling progenitors.

Tarzan was not surprised that at a short distance he aroused no
suspicion or curiosity in the minds of those who saw him, since, until
closer scrutiny was possible, there was little to distinguish him from
a native either in his general conformation or his color. He had, of
course, formulated a plan of action and, having decided, he did not
hesitate in the carrying out his plan.

With the same assurance that you might venture upon the main street of
a neighboring city Tarzan strode into the Ho-don city of A-lur. The
first person to detect his spuriousness was a little child playing in
the arched gateway of one of the walled buildings. "No tail! no tail!"
it shouted, throwing a stone at him, and then it suddenly grew dumb and
its eyes wide as it sensed that this creature was something other than
a mere Ho-don warrior who had lost his tail. With a gasp the child
turned and fled screaming into the courtyard of its home.

Tarzan continued on his way, fully realizing that the moment was
imminent when the fate of his plan would be decided. Nor had he long to
wait since at the next turning of the winding street he came face to
face with a Ho-don warrior. He saw the sudden surprise in the latter's
eyes, followed instantly by one of suspicion, but before the fellow
could speak Tarzan addressed him.

"I am a stranger from another land," he said; "I would speak with
Ko-tan, your king."

The fellow stepped back, laying his hand upon his knife. "There are no
strangers that come to the gates of A-lur," he said, "other than as
enemies or slaves."

"I come neither as a slave nor an enemy," replied Tarzan. "I come
directly from Jad-ben-Otho. Look!" and he held out his hands that the
Ho-don might see how greatly they differed from his own, and then
wheeled about that the other might see that he was tailless, for it was
upon this fact that his plan had been based, due to his recollection of
the quarrel between Ta-den and Om-at, in which the Waz-don had claimed
that Jad-ben-Otho had a long tail while the Ho-don had been equally
willing to fight for his faith in the taillessness of his god.

The warrior's eyes widened and an expression of awe crept into them,
though it was still tinged with suspicion. "Jad-ben-Otho!" he murmured,
and then, "It is true that you are neither Ho-don nor Waz-don, and it
is also true that Jad-ben-Otho has no tail.  Come," he said, "I will
take you to Ko-tan, for this is a matter in which no common warrior may
interfere. Follow me," and still clutching the handle of his knife and
keeping a wary side glance upon the ape-man he led the way through
A-lur.

The city covered a large area. Sometimes there was a considerable
distance between groups of buildings, and again they were quite close
together. There were numerous imposing groups, evidently hewn from the
larger hills, often rising to a height of a hundred feet or more. As
they advanced they met numerous warriors and women, all of whom showed
great curiosity in the stranger, but there was no attempt to menace him
when it was found that he was being conducted to the palace of the king.

They came at last to a great pile that sprawled over a considerable
area, its western front facing upon a large blue lake and evidently
hewn from what had once been a natural cliff.  This group of buildings
was surrounded by a wall of considerably greater height than any that
Tarzan had before seen. His guide led him to a gateway before which
waited a dozen or more warriors who had risen to their feet and formed
a barrier across the entrance-way as Tarzan and his party appeared
around the corner of the palace wall, for by this time he had
accumulated such a following of the curious as presented to the guards
the appearance of a formidable mob.

The guide's story told, Tarzan was conducted into the courtyard where
he was held while one of the warriors entered the palace, evidently
with the intention of notifying Ko-tan. Fifteen minutes later a large
warrior appeared, followed by several others, all of whom examined
Tarzan with every sign of curiosity as they approached.

The leader of the party halted before the ape-man. "Who are you?" he
asked, "and what do you want of Ko-tan, the king?"

"I am a friend," replied the ape-man, "and I have come from the country
of Jad-ben-Otho to visit Ko-tan of Pal-ul-don."

The warrior and his followers seemed impressed. Tarzan could see the
latter whispering among themselves.

"How come you here," asked the spokesman, "and what do you want of
Ko-tan?"

Tarzan drew himself to his full height. "Enough!" he cried.  "Must the
messenger of Jad-ben-Otho be subjected to the treatment that might be
accorded to a wandering Waz-don? Take me to the king at once lest the
wrath of Jad-ben-Otho fall upon you."

There was some question in the mind of the ape-man as to how far he
might carry his unwarranted show of assurance, and he waited therefore
with amused interest the result of his demand. He did not, however,
have long to wait for almost immediately the attitude of his questioner
changed. He whitened, cast an apprehensive glance toward the eastern
sky and then extended his right palm toward Tarzan, placing his left
over his own heart in the sign of amity that was common among the
peoples of Pal-ul-don.

Tarzan stepped quickly back as though from a profaning hand, a feigned
expression of horror and disgust upon his face.

"Stop!" he cried, "who would dare touch the sacred person of the
messenger of Jad-ben-Otho? Only as a special mark of favor from
Jad-ben-Otho may even Ko-tan himself receive this honor from me.
Hasten! Already now have I waited too long! What manner of reception
the Ho-don of A-lur would extend to the son of my father!"

At first Tarzan had been inclined to adopt the role of Jad-ben-Otho
himself but it occurred to him that it might prove embarrassing and
considerable of a bore to be compelled constantly to portray the
character of a god, but with the growing success of his scheme it had
suddenly occurred to him that the authority of the son of Jad-ben-Otho
would be far greater than that of an ordinary messenger of a god, while
at the same time giving him some leeway in the matter of his acts and
demeanor, the ape-man reasoning that a young god would not be held so
strictly accountable in the matter of his dignity and bearing as an
older and greater god.

This time the effect of his words was immediately and painfully
noticeable upon all those near him. With one accord they shrank back,
the spokesman almost collapsing in evident terror. His apologies, when
finally the paralysis of his fear would permit him to voice them, were
so abject that the ape-man could scarce repress a smile of amused
contempt.

"Have mercy, O Dor-ul-Otho," he pleaded, "on poor old Dak-lot. Precede
me and I will show you to where Ko-tan, the king, awaits you,
trembling. Aside, snakes and vermin," he cried pushing his warriors to
right and left for the purpose of forming an avenue for Tarzan.

"Come!" cried the ape-man peremptorily, "lead the way, and let these
others follow."

The now thoroughly frightened Dak-lot did as he was bid, and Tarzan of
the Apes was ushered into the palace of Kotan, King of Pal-ul-don.



9

Blood-Stained Altars

The entrance through which he caught his first glimpse of the interior
was rather beautifully carved in geometric designs, and within the
walls were similarly treated, though as he proceeded from one apartment
to another he found also the figures of animals, birds, and men taking
their places among the more formal figures of the mural decorator's
art. Stone vessels were much in evidence as well as ornaments of gold
and the skins of many animals, but nowhere did he see an indication of
any woven fabric, indicating that in that respect at least the Ho-don
were still low in the scale of evolution, and yet the proportions and
symmetry of the corridors and apartments bespoke a degree of
civilization.

The way led through several apartments and long corridors, up at least
three flights of stone stairs and finally out upon a ledge upon the
western side of the building overlooking the blue lake. Along this
ledge, or arcade, his guide led him for a hundred yards, to stop at
last before a wide entrance-way leading into another apartment of the
palace.

Here Tarzan beheld a considerable concourse of warriors in an enormous
apartment, the domed ceiling of which was fully fifty feet above the
floor. Almost filling the chamber was a great pyramid ascending in
broad steps well up under the dome in which were a number of round
apertures which let in the light. The steps of the pyramid were
occupied by warriors to the very pinnacle, upon which sat a large,
imposing figure of a man whose golden trappings shone brightly in the
light of the afternoon sun, a shaft of which poured through one of the
tiny apertures of the dome.

"Ko-tan!" cried Dak-lot, addressing the resplendent figure at the
pinnacle of the pyramid. "Ko-tan and warriors of Pal-ul-don! Behold the
honor that Jad-ben-Otho has done you in sending as his messenger his
own son," and Dak-lot, stepping aside, indicated Tarzan with a dramatic
sweep of his hand.

Ko-tan rose to his feet and every warrior within sight craned his neck
to have a better view of the newcomer. Those upon the opposite side of
the pyramid crowded to the front as the words of the old warrior
reached them. Skeptical were the expressions on most of the faces; but
theirs was a skepticism marked with caution. No matter which way
fortune jumped they wished to be upon the right side of the fence. For
a moment all eyes were centered upon Tarzan and then gradually they
drifted to Ko-tan, for from his attitude would they receive the cue
that would determine theirs. But Ko-tan was evidently in the same
quandary as they--the very attitude of his body indicated it--it was
one of indecision and of doubt.

The ape-man stood erect, his arms folded upon his broad breast, an
expression of haughty disdain upon his handsome face; but to Dak-lot
there seemed to be indications also of growing anger. The situation was
becoming strained. Dak-lot fidgeted, casting apprehensive glances at
Tarzan and appealing ones at Ko-tan. The silence of the tomb wrapped
the great chamber of the throneroom of Pal-ul-don.

At last Ko-tan spoke. "Who says that he is Dor-ul-Otho?" he asked,
casting a terrible look at Dak-lot.

"He does!" almost shouted that terrified noble.

"And so it must be true?" queried Ko-tan.

Could it be that there was a trace of irony in the chief's tone? Otho
forbid! Dak-lot cast a side glance at Tarzan--a glance that he intended
should carry the assurance of his own faith; but that succeeded only in
impressing the ape-man with the other's pitiable terror.

"O Ko-tan!" pleaded Dak-lot, "your own eyes must convince you that
indeed he is the son of Otho. Behold his godlike figure, his hands, and
his feet, that are not as ours, and that he is entirely tailless as is
his mighty father."

Ko-tan appeared to be perceiving these facts for the first time and
there was an indication that his skepticism was faltering. At that
moment a young warrior who had pushed his way forward from the opposite
side of the pyramid to where he could obtain a good look at Tarzan
raised his voice.

"Ko-tan," he cried, "it must be even as Dak-lot says, for I am sure now
that I have seen Dor-ul-Otho before. Yesterday as we were returning
with the Kor-ul-lul prisoners we beheld him seated upon the back of a
great GRYF. We hid in the woods before he came too near, but I saw
enough to make sure that he who rode upon the great beast was none
other than the messenger who stands here now."

This evidence seemed to be quite enough to convince the majority of the
warriors that they indeed stood in the presence of deity--their faces
showed it only too plainly, and a sudden modesty that caused them to
shrink behind their neighbors. As their neighbors were attempting to do
the same thing, the result was a sudden melting away of those who stood
nearest the ape-man, until the steps of the pyramid directly before him
lay vacant to the very apex and to Ko-tan. The latter, possibly
influenced as much by the fearful attitude of his followers as by the
evidence adduced, now altered his tone and his manner in such a degree
as might comport with the requirements if the stranger was indeed the
Dor-ul-Otho while leaving his dignity a loophole of escape should it
appear that he had entertained an impostor.

"If indeed you are the Dor-ul-Otho," he said, addressing Tarzan, "you
will know that our doubts were but natural since we have received no
sign from Jad-ben-Otho that he intended honoring us so greatly, nor how
could we know, even, that the Great God had a son? If you are he, all
Pal-ul-don rejoices to honor you; if you are not he, swift and terrible
shall be the punishment of your temerity. I, Ko-tan, King of
Pal-ul-don, have spoken."

"And spoken well, as a king should speak," said Tarzan, breaking his
long silence, "who fears and honors the god of his people. It is well
that you insist that I indeed be the Dor-ul-Otho before you accord me
the homage that is my due. Jad-ben-Otho charged me specially to
ascertain if you were fit to rule his people. My first experience of
you indicates that Jad-ben-Otho chose well when he breathed the spirit
of a king into the babe at your mother's breast."

The effect of this statement, made so casually, was marked in the
expressions and excited whispers of the now awe-struck assemblage. At
last they knew how kings were made! It was decided by Jad-ben-Otho
while the candidate was still a suckling babe!  Wonderful! A miracle!
and this divine creature in whose presence they stood knew all about
it. Doubtless he even discussed such matters with their god daily. If
there had been an atheist among them before, or an agnostic, there was
none now, for had they not looked with their own eyes upon the son of
god?

"It is well then," continued the ape-man, "that you should assure
yourself that I am no impostor. Come closer that you may see that I am
not as are men. Furthermore it is not meet that you stand upon a higher
level than the son of your god." There was a sudden scramble to reach
the floor of the throne-room, nor was Ko-tan far behind his warriors,
though he managed to maintain a certain majestic dignity as he
descended the broad stairs that countless naked feet had polished to a
gleaming smoothness through the ages. "And now," said Tarzan as the
king stood before him, "you can have no doubt that I am not of the same
race as you. Your priests have told you that Jad-ben-Otho is tailless.
Tailless, therefore, must be the race of gods that spring from his
loins.  But enough of such proofs as these! You know the power of
Jad-ben-Otho; how his lightnings gleaming out of the sky carry death as
he wills it; how the rains come at his bidding, and the fruits and the
berries and the grains, the grasses, the trees and the flowers spring
to life at his divine direction; you have witnessed birth and death,
and those who honor their god honor him because he controls these
things. How would it fare then with an impostor who claimed to be the
son of this all-powerful god?  This then is all the proof that you
require, for as he would strike you down should you deny me, so would
he strike down one who wrongfully claimed kinship with him."

This line of argument being unanswerable must needs be convincing.
There could be no questioning of this creature's statements without the
tacit admission of lack of faith in the omnipotence of Jad-ben-Otho.
Ko-tan was satisfied that he was entertaining deity, but as to just
what form his entertainment should take he was rather at a loss to
know. His conception of god had been rather a vague and hazy affair,
though in common with all primitive people his god was a personal one
as were his devils and demons. The pleasures of Jad-ben-Otho he had
assumed to be the excesses which he himself enjoyed, but devoid of any
unpleasant reaction. It therefore occurred to him that the Dor-ul-Otho
would be greatly entertained by eating--eating large quantities of
everything that Ko-tan liked best and that he had found most injurious;
and there was also a drink that the women of the Ho-don made by
allowing corn to soak in the juices of succulent fruits, to which they
had added certain other ingredients best known to themselves. Ko-tan
knew by experience that a single draught of this potent liquor would
bring happiness and surcease from worry, while several would cause even
a king to do things and enjoy things that he would never even think of
doing or enjoying while not under the magical influence of the potion,
but unfortunately the next morning brought suffering in direct ratio to
the joy of the preceding day. A god, Ko-tan reasoned, could experience
all the pleasure without the headache, but for the immediate present he
must think of the necessary dignities and honors to be accorded his
immortal guest.

No foot other than a king's had touched the surface of the apex of the
pyramid in the throneroom at A-lur during all the forgotten ages
through which the kings of Pal-ul-don had ruled from its high eminence.
So what higher honor could Ko-tan offer than to give place beside him
to the Dor-ul-Otho? And so he invited Tarzan to ascend the pyramid and
take his place upon the stone bench that topped it. As they reached the
step below the sacred pinnacle Ko-tan continued as though to mount to
his throne, but Tarzan laid a detaining hand upon his arm.

"None may sit upon a level with the gods," he admonished, stepping
confidently up and seating himself upon the throne. The abashed Ko-tan
showed his embarrassment, an embarrassment he feared to voice lest he
incur the wrath of the king of kings.

"But," added Tarzan, "a god may honor his faithful servant by inviting
him to a place at his side. Come, Ko-tan; thus would I honor you in the
name of Jad-ben-Otho."

The ape-man's policy had for its basis an attempt not only to arouse
the fearful respect of Ko-tan but to do it without making of him an
enemy at heart, for he did not know how strong a hold the religion of
the Ho-don had upon them, for since the time that he had prevented
Ta-den and Om-at from quarreling over a religious difference the
subject had been utterly taboo among them. He was therefore quick to
note the evident though wordless resentment of Ko-tan at the suggestion
that he entirely relinquish his throne to his guest. On the whole,
however, the effect had been satisfactory as he could see from the
renewed evidence of awe upon the faces of the warriors.

At Tarzan's direction the business of the court continued where it had
been interrupted by his advent. It consisted principally in the
settling of disputes between warriors. There was present one who stood
upon the step just below the throne and which Tarzan was to learn was
the place reserved for the higher chiefs of the allied tribes which
made up Ko-tan's kingdom. The one who attracted Tarzan's attention was
a stalwart warrior of powerful physique and massive, lion-like
features. He was addressing Ko-tan on a question that is as old as
government and that will continue in unabated importance until man
ceases to exist. It had to do with a boundary dispute with one of his
neighbors.

The matter itself held little or no interest for Tarzan, but he was
impressed by the appearance of the speaker and when Ko-tan addressed
him as Ja-don the ape-man's interest was permanently crystallized, for
Ja-don was the father of Ta-den. That the knowledge would benefit him
in any way seemed rather a remote possibility since he could not reveal
to Ja-don his friendly relations with his son without admitting the
falsity of his claims to godship.

When the affairs of the audience were concluded Ko-tan suggested that
the son of Jad-ben-Otho might wish to visit the temple in which were
performed the religious rites coincident to the worship of the Great
God. And so the ape-man was conducted by the king himself, followed by
the warriors of his court, through the corridors of the palace toward
the northern end of the group of buildings within the royal enclosure.

The temple itself was really a part of the palace and similar in
architecture. There were several ceremonial places of varying sizes,
the purposes of which Tarzan could only conjecture. Each had an altar
in the west end and another in the east and were oval in shape, their
longest diameter lying due east and west.  Each was excavated from the
summit of a small hillock and all were without roofs. The western
altars invariably were a single block of stone the top of which was
hollowed into an oblong basin. Those at the eastern ends were similar
blocks of stone with flat tops and these latter, unlike those at the
opposite ends of the ovals were invariably stained or painted a reddish
brown, nor did Tarzan need to examine them closely to be assured of
what his keen nostrils already had told him--that the brown stains were
dried and drying human blood.

Below these temple courts were corridors and apartments reaching far
into the bowels of the hills, dim, gloomy passages that Tarzan glimpsed
as he was led from place to place on his tour of inspection of the
temple. A messenger had been dispatched by Ko-tan to announce the
coming visit of the son of Jad-ben-Otho with the result that they were
accompanied through the temple by a considerable procession of priests
whose distinguishing mark of profession seemed to consist in grotesque
headdresses; sometimes hideous faces carved from wood and entirely
concealing the countenances of their wearers, or again, the head of a
wild beast cunningly fitted over the head of a man. The high priest
alone wore no such head-dress. He was an old man with close-set,
cunning eyes and a cruel, thin-lipped mouth.

At first sight of him Tarzan realized that here lay the greatest danger
to his ruse, for he saw at a glance that the man was antagonistic
toward him and his pretensions, and he knew too that doubtless of all
the people of Pal-ul-don the high priest was most likely to harbor the
truest estimate of Jad-ben-Otho, and, therefore, would look with
suspicion on one who claimed to be the son of a fabulous god.

No matter what suspicion lurked within his crafty mind, Lu-don, the
high priest of A-lur, did not openly question Tarzan's right to the
title of Dor-ul-Otho, and it may be that he was restrained by the same
doubts which had originally restrained Ko-tan and his warriors--the
doubt that is at the bottom of the minds of all blasphemers even and
which is based upon the fear that after all there may be a god. So, for
the time being at least Lu-don played safe. Yet Tarzan knew as well as
though the man had spoken aloud his inmost thoughts that it was in the
heart of the high priest to tear the veil from his imposture.

At the entrance to the temple Ko-tan had relinquished the guidance of
the guest to Lu-don and now the latter led Tarzan through those
portions of the temple that he wished him to see.  He showed him the
great room where the votive offerings were kept, gifts from the
barbaric chiefs of Pal-ul-don and from their followers. These things
ranged in value from presents of dried fruits to massive vessels of
beaten gold, so that in the great main storeroom and its connecting
chambers and corridors was an accumulation of wealth that amazed even
the eyes of the owner of the secret of the treasure vaults of Opar.

Moving to and fro throughout the temple were sleek black Waz-don
slaves, fruits of the Ho-don raids upon the villages of their less
civilized neighbors. As they passed the barred entrance to a dim
corridor, Tarzan saw within a great company of pithecanthropi of all
ages and of both sexes, Ho-don as well as Waz-don, the majority of them
squatted upon the stone floor in attitudes of utter dejection while
some paced back and forth, their features stamped with the despair of
utter hopelessness.

"And who are these who lie here thus unhappily?" he asked of Lu-don. It
was the first question that he had put to the high priest since
entering the temple, and instantly he regretted that he had asked it,
for Lu-don turned upon him a face upon which the expression of
suspicion was but thinly veiled.

"Who should know better than the son of Jad-ben-Otho?" he retorted.

"The questions of Dor-ul-Otho are not with impunity answered with other
questions," said the ape-man quietly, "and it may interest Lu-don, the
high priest, to know that the blood of a false priest upon the altar of
his temple is not displeasing in the eyes of Jad-ben-Otho."

Lu-don paled as he answered Tarzan's question. "They are the offerings
whose blood must refresh the eastern altars as the sun returns to your
father at the day's end."

"And who told you," asked Tarzan, "that Jad-ben-Otho was pleased that
his people were slain upon his altars? What if you were mistaken?"

"Then countless thousands have died in vain," replied Lu-don.

Ko-tan and the surrounding warriors and priests were listening
attentively to the dialogue. Some of the poor victims behind the barred
gateway had heard and rising, pressed close to the barrier through
which one was conducted just before sunset each day, never to return.

"Liberate them!" cried Tarzan with a wave of his hand toward the
imprisoned victims of a cruel superstition, "for I can tell you in the
name of Jad-ben-Otho that you are mistaken."



10

The Forbidden Garden

Lu-don paled. "It is sacrilege," he cried; "for countless ages have the
priests of the Great God offered each night a life to the spirit of
Jad-ben-Otho as it returned below the western horizon to its master,
and never has the Great God given sign that he was displeased."

"Stop!" commanded Tarzan. "It is the blindness of the priesthood that
has failed to read the messages of their god. Your warriors die beneath
the knives and clubs of the Wazdon; your hunters are taken by JA and
JATO; no day goes by but witnesses the deaths of few or many in the
villages of the Ho-don, and one death each day of those that die are
the toll which Jad-ben-Otho has exacted for the lives you take upon the
eastern altar. What greater sign of his displeasure could you require,
O stupid priest?"

Lu-don was silent. There was raging within him a great conflict between
his fear that this indeed might be the son of god and his hope that it
was not, but at last his fear won and he bowed his head. "The son of
Jad-ben-Otho has spoken," he said, and turning to one of the lesser
priests: "Remove the bars and return these people from whence they
came."

He thus addressed did as he was bid and as the bars came down the
prisoners, now all fully aware of the miracle that had saved them,
crowded forward and throwing themselves upon their knees before Tarzan
raised their voices in thanksgiving.

Ko-tan was almost as staggered as the high priest by this ruthless
overturning of an age-old religious rite. "But what," he cried, "may we
do that will be pleasing in the eyes of Jad-ben-Otho?" turning a look
of puzzled apprehension toward the ape-man.

"If you seek to please your god," he replied, "place upon your altars
such gifts of food and apparel as are most welcome in the city of your
people. These things will Jad-ben-Otho bless, when you may distribute
them among those of the city who need them most. With such things are
your storerooms filled as I have seen with mine own eyes, and other
gifts will be brought when the priests tell the people that in this way
they find favor before their god," and Tarzan turned and signified that
he would leave the temple.

As they were leaving the precincts devoted to the worship of their
deity, the ape-man noticed a small but rather ornate building that
stood entirely detached from the others as though it had been cut from
a little pinnacle of limestone which had stood out from its fellows. As
his interested glance passed over it he noticed that its door and
windows were barred.

"To what purpose is that building dedicated?" he asked of Lu-don. "Who
do you keep imprisoned there?"

"It is nothing," replied the high priest nervously, "there is no one
there. The place is vacant. Once it was used but not now for many
years," and he moved on toward the gateway which led back into the
palace. Here he and the priests halted while Tarzan with Ko-tan and his
warriors passed out from the sacred precincts of the temple grounds.

The one question which Tarzan would have asked he had feared to ask for
he knew that in the hearts of many lay a suspicion as to his
genuineness, but he determined that before he slept he would put the
question to Ko-tan, either directly or indirectly--as to whether there
was, or had been recently within the city of A-lur a female of the same
race as his.

As their evening meal was being served to them in the banquet hall of
Ko-tan's palace by a part of the army of black slaves upon whose
shoulders fell the burden of all the heavy and menial tasks of the
city, Tarzan noticed that there came to the eyes of one of the slaves
what was apparently an expression of startled recognition, as he looked
upon the ape-man for the first time in the banquet hall of Ko-tan. And
again later he saw the fellow whisper to another slave and nod his head
in his direction. The ape-man did not recall ever having seen this
Waz-don before and he was at a loss to account for an explanation of
the fellow's interest in him, and presently the incident was all but
forgotten.

Ko-tan was surprised and inwardly disgusted to discover that his godly
guest had no desire to gorge himself upon rich foods and that he would
not even so much as taste the villainous brew of the Ho-don. To Tarzan
the banquet was a dismal and tiresome affair, since so great was the
interest of the guests in gorging themselves with food and drink that
they had no time for conversation, the only vocal sounds being confined
to a continuous grunting which, together with their table manners
reminded Tarzan of a visit he had once made to the famous Berkshire
herd of His Grace, the Duke of Westminster at Woodhouse, Chester.

One by one the diners succumbed to the stupefying effects of the liquor
with the result that the grunting gave place to snores, so presently
Tarzan and the slaves were the only conscious creatures in the banquet
hall.

Rising, the ape-man turned to a tall black who stood behind him. "I
would sleep," he said, "show me to my apartment."

As the fellow conducted him from the chamber the slave who had shown
surprise earlier in the evening at sight of him, spoke again at length
to one of his fellows. The latter cast a half-frightened look in the
direction of the departing ape-man.  "If you are right," he said, "they
should reward us with our liberty, but if you are wrong, O
Jad-ben-Otho, what will be our fate?"

"But I am not wrong!" cried the other.

"Then there is but one to tell this to, for I have heard that he looked
sour when this Dor-ul-Otho was brought to the temple and that while the
so-called son of Jad-ben-Otho was there he gave this one every cause to
fear and hate him. I mean Lu-don, the high priest."

"You know him?" asked the other slave.

"I have worked in the temple," replied his companion.

"Then go to him at once and tell him, but be sure to exact the promise
of our freedom for the proof."

And so a black Waz-don came to the temple gate and asked to see Lu-don,
the high priest, on a matter of great importance, and though the hour
was late Lu-don saw him, and when he had heard his story he promised
him and his friend not only their freedom but many gifts if they could
prove the correctness of their claims.

And as the slave talked with the high priest in the temple at A-lur the
figure of a man groped its way around the shoulder of Pastar-ul-ved and
the moonlight glistened from the shiny barrel of an Enfield that was
strapped to the naked back, and brass cartridges shed tiny rays of
reflected light from their polished cases where they hung in the
bandoliers across the broad brown shoulders and the lean waist.

Tarzan's guide conducted him to a chamber overlooking the blue lake
where he found a bed similar to that which he had seen in the villages
of the Waz-don, merely a raised dais of stone upon which was piled
great quantities of furry pelts. And so he lay down to sleep, the
question that he most wished to put still unasked and unanswered.

With the coming of a new day he was awake and wandering about the
palace and the palace grounds before there was sign of any of the
inmates of the palace other than slaves, or at least he saw no others
at first, though presently he stumbled upon an enclosure which lay
almost within the center of the palace grounds surrounded by a wall
that piqued the ape-man's curiosity, since he had determined to
investigate as fully as possible every part of the palace and its
environs.

This place, whatever it might be, was apparently without doors or
windows but that it was at least partially roofless was evidenced by
the sight of the waving branches of a tree which spread above the top
of the wall near him. Finding no other method of access, the ape-man
uncoiled his rope and throwing it over the branch of the tree where it
projected beyond the wall, was soon climbing with the ease of a monkey
to the summit.

There he found that the wall surrounded an enclosed garden in which
grew trees and shrubs and flowers in riotous profusion.  Without
waiting to ascertain whether the garden was empty or contained Ho-don,
Waz-don, or wild beasts, Tarzan dropped lightly to the sward on the
inside and without further loss of time commenced a systematic
investigation of the enclosure.

His curiosity was aroused by the very evident fact that the place was
not for general use, even by those who had free access to other parts
of the palace grounds and so there was added to its natural beauties an
absence of mortals which rendered its exploration all the more alluring
to Tarzan since it suggested that in such a place might he hope to come
upon the object of his long and difficult search.

In the garden were tiny artificial streams and little pools of water,
flanked by flowering bushes, as though it all had been designed by the
cunning hand of some master gardener, so faithfully did it carry out
the beauties and contours of nature upon a miniature scale.

The interior surface of the wall was fashioned to represent the white
cliffs of Pal-ul-don, broken occasionally by small replicas of the
verdure-filled gorges of the original.

Filled with admiration and thoroughly enjoying each new surprise which
the scene offered, Tarzan moved slowly around the garden, and as always
he moved silently. Passing through a miniature forest he came presently
upon a tiny area of flowerstudded sward and at the same time beheld
before him the first Ho-don female he had seen since entering the
palace. A young and beautiful woman stood in the center of the little
open space, stroking the head of a bird which she held against her
golden breastplate with one hand. Her profile was presented to the
ape-man and he saw that by the standards of any land she would have
been accounted more than lovely.

Seated in the grass at her feet, with her back toward him, was a female
Waz-don slave. Seeing that she he sought was not there and apprehensive
that an alarm be raised were he discovered by the two women, Tarzan
moved back to hide himself in the foliage, but before he had succeeded
the Ho-don girl turned quickly toward him as though apprised of his
presence by that unnamed sense, the manifestations of which are more or
less familiar to us all.

At sight of him her eyes registered only her surprise though there was
no expression of terror reflected in them, nor did she scream or even
raise her well-modulated voice as she addressed him.

"Who are you," she asked, "who enters thus boldly the Forbidden Garden?"

At sound of her mistress' voice the slave maiden turned quickly, rising
to her feet. "Tarzan-jad-guru!" she exclaimed in tones of mingled
astonishment and relief.

"You know him?" cried her mistress turning toward the slave and
affording Tarzan an opportunity to raise a cautioning finger to his
lips lest Pan-at-lee further betray him, for it was Pan-at-lee indeed
who stood before him, no less a source of surprise to him than had his
presence been to her.

Thus questioned by her mistress and simultaneously admonished to
silence by Tarzan, Pan-at-lee was momentarily silenced and then
haltingly she groped for a way to extricate herself from her dilemma.
"I thought--" she faltered, "but no, I am mistaken--I thought that he
was one whom I had seen before near the Kor-ul-GRYF."

The Ho-don looked first at one and then at the other an expression of
doubt and questioning in her eyes. "But you have not answered me," she
continued presently; "who are you?"

"You have not heard then," asked Tarzan, "of the visitor who arrived at
your king's court yesterday?"

"You mean," she exclaimed, "that you are the Dor-ul-Otho?" And now the
erstwhile doubting eyes reflected naught but awe.

"I am he," replied Tarzan; "and you?"

"I am O-lo-a, daughter of Ko-tan, the king," she replied.

So this was O-lo-a, for love of whom Ta-den had chosen exile rather
than priesthood. Tarzan had approached more closely the dainty
barbarian princess. "Daughter of Ko-tan," he said, "Jad-ben-Otho is
pleased with you and as a mark of his favor he has preserved for you
through many dangers him whom you love."

"I do not understand," replied the girl but the flush that mounted to
her cheek belied her words. "Bu-lat is a guest in the palace of Ko-tan,
my father. I do not know that he has faced any danger. It is to Bu-lat
that I am betrothed."

"But it is not Bu-lat whom you love," said Tarzan.

Again the flush and the girl half turned her face away. "Have I then
displeased the Great God?" she asked.

"No," replied Tarzan; "as I told you he is well satisfied and for your
sake he has saved Ta-den for you."

"Jad-ben-Otho knows all," whispered the girl, "and his son shares his
great knowledge."

"No," Tarzan hastened to correct her lest a reputation for omniscience
might prove embarrassing. "I know only what Jad-ben-Otho wishes me to
know."

"But tell me," she said, "I shall be reunited with Ta-den?  Surely the
son of god can read the future."

The ape-man was glad that he had left himself an avenue of escape. "I
know nothing of the future," he replied, "other than what Jad-ben-Otho
tells me. But I think you need have no fear for the future if you
remain faithful to Ta-den and Ta-den's friends."

"You have seen him?" asked O-lo-a. "Tell me, where is he?"

"Yes," replied Tarzan, "I have seen him. He was with Om-at, the gund of
Kor-ul-JA."

"A prisoner of the Waz-don?" interrupted the girl.

"Not a prisoner but an honored guest," replied the ape-man.

"Wait," he exclaimed, raising his face toward the heavens; "do not
speak. I am receiving a message from Jad-ben-Otho, my father."

The two women dropped to their knees, covering their faces with their
hands, stricken with awe at the thought of the awful nearness of the
Great God. Presently Tarzan touched O-lo-a on the shoulder.

"Rise," he said. "Jad-ben-Otho has spoken. He has told me that this
slave girl is from the tribe of Kor-ul-JA, where Ta-den is, and that
she is betrothed to Om-at, their chief. Her name is Pan-at-lee."

O-lo-a turned questioningly toward Pan-at-lee. The latter nodded, her
simple mind unable to determine whether or not she and her mistress
were the victims of a colossal hoax. "It is even as he says," she
whispered.

O-lo-a fell upon her knees and touched her forehead to Tarzan's feet.
"Great is the honor that Jad-ben-Otho has done his poor servant," she
cried. "Carry to him my poor thanks for the happiness that he has
brought to O-lo-a."

"It would please my father," said Tarzan, "if you were to cause
Pan-at-lee to be returned in safety to the village of her people."

"What cares Jad-ben-Otho for such as she?" asked O-lo-a, a slight trace
of hauteur in her tone.

"There is but one god," replied Tarzan, "and he is the god of the
Waz-don as well as of the Ho-don; of the birds and the beasts and the
flowers and of everything that grows upon the earth or beneath the
waters. If Pan-at-lee does right she is greater in the eyes of
Jad-ben-Otho than would be the daughter of Ko-tan should she do wrong."

It was evident that O-lo-a did not quite understand this interpretation
of divine favor, so contrary was it to the teachings of the priesthood
of her people. In one respect only did Tarzan's teachings coincide with
her belief--that there was but one god. For the rest she had always
been taught that he was solely the god of the Ho-don in every sense,
other than that other creatures were created by Jad-ben-Otho to serve
some useful purpose for the benefit of the Ho-don race. And now to be
told by the son of god that she stood no higher in divine esteem than
the black handmaiden at her side was indeed a shock to her pride, her
vanity, and her faith. But who could question the word of Dor-ul-Otho,
especially when she had with her own eyes seen him in actual communion
with god in heaven?

"The will of Jad-ben-Otho be done," said O-lo-a meekly, "if it lies
within my power. But it would be best, O Dor-ul-Otho, to communicate
your father's wish directly to the king."

"Then keep her with you," said Tarzan, "and see that no harm befalls
her."

O-lo-a looked ruefully at Pan-at-lee. "She was brought to me but
yesterday," she said, "and never have I had slave woman who pleased me
better. I shall hate to part with her."

"But there are others," said Tarzan.

"Yes," replied O-lo-a, "there are others, but there is only one
Pan-at-lee."

"Many slaves are brought to the city?" asked Tarzan.

"Yes," she replied.

"And many strangers come from other lands?" he asked.

She shook her head negatively. "Only the Ho-don from the other side of
the Valley of Jad-ben-Otho," she replied, "and they are not strangers."

"Am I then the first stranger to enter the gates of A-lur?" he asked.

"Can it be," she parried, "that the son of Jad-ben-Otho need question a
poor ignorant mortal like O-lo-a?"

"As I told you before," replied Tarzan, "Jad-ben-Otho alone is
all-knowing."

"Then if he wished you to know this thing," retorted O-lo-a quickly,
"you would know it."

Inwardly the ape-man smiled that this little heathen's astuteness
should beat him at his own game, yet in a measure her evasion of the
question might be an answer to it. "There have been other strangers
here then recently?" he persisted.

"I cannot tell you what I do not know," she replied. "Always is the
palace of Ko-tan filled with rumors, but how much fact and how much
fancy how may a woman of the palace know?"

"There has been such a rumor then?" he asked.

"It was only rumor that reached the Forbidden Garden," she replied.

"It described, perhaps, a woman of another race?" As he put the
question and awaited her answer he thought that his heart ceased to
beat, so grave to him was the issue at stake.

The girl hesitated before replying, and then. "No," she said, "I cannot
speak of this thing, for if it be of sufficient importance to elicit
the interest of the gods then indeed would I be subject to the wrath of
my father should I discuss it."

"In the name of Jad-ben-Otho I command you to speak," said Tarzan. "In
the name of Jad-ben-Otho in whose hands lies the fate of Ta-den!"

The girl paled. "Have mercy!" she cried, "and for the sake of Ta-den I
will tell you all that I know."

"Tell what?" demanded a stern voice from the shrubbery behind them. The
three turned to see the figure of Ko-tan emerging from the foliage. An
angry scowl distorted his kingly features but at sight of Tarzan it
gave place to an expression of surprise not unmixed with fear.
"Dor-ul-Otho!" he exclaimed, "I did not know that it was you," and
then, raising his head and squaring his shoulders he said, "but there
are places where even the son of the Great God may not walk and this,
the Forbidden Garden of Ko-tan, is one."

It was a challenge but despite the king's bold front there was a note
of apology in it, indicating that in his superstitious mind there
flourished the inherent fear of man for his Maker. "Come, Dor-ul-Otho,"
he continued, "I do not know all this foolish child has said to you but
whatever you would know Ko-tan, the king, will tell you. O-lo-a, go to
your quarters immediately," and he pointed with stern finger toward the
opposite end of the garden.

The princess, followed by Pan-at-lee, turned at once and left them.

"We will go this way," said Ko-tan and preceding, led Tarzan in another
direction. Close to that part of the wall which they approached Tarzan
perceived a grotto in the miniature cliff into the interior of which
Ko-tan led him, and down a rocky stairway to a gloomy corridor the
opposite end of which opened into the palace proper. Two armed warriors
stood at this entrance to the Forbidden Garden, evidencing how
jealously were the sacred precincts of the place guarded.

In silence Ko-tan led the way back to his own quarters in the palace. A
large chamber just outside the room toward which Ko-tan was leading his
guest was filled with chiefs and warriors awaiting the pleasure of
their ruler. As the two entered, an aisle was formed for them the
length of the chamber, down which they passed in silence.

Close to the farther door and half hidden by the warriors who stood
before him was Lu-don, the high priest. Tarzan glimpsed him but briefly
but in that short period he was aware of a cunning and malevolent
expression upon the cruel countenance that he was subconsciously aware
boded him no good, and then with Ko-tan he passed into the adjoining
room and the hangings dropped.

At the same moment the hideous headdress of an under priest appeared in
the entrance of the outer chamber. Its owner, pausing for a moment,
glanced quickly around the interior and then having located him whom he
sought moved rapidly in the direction of Lu-don. There was a whispered
conversation which was terminated by the high priest.

"Return immediately to the quarters of the princess," he said, "and see
that the slave is sent to me at the temple at once." The under priest
turned and departed upon his mission while Lu-don also left the
apartment and directed his footsteps toward the sacred enclosure over
which he ruled.

A half-hour later a warrior was ushered into the presence of Ko-tan.
"Lu-don, the high priest, desires the presence of Ko-tan, the king, in
the temple," he announced, "and it is his wish that he come alone."

Ko-tan nodded to indicate that he accepted the command which even the
king must obey. "I will return presently, Dor-ul-Otho," he said to
Tarzan, "and in the meantime my warriors and my slaves are yours to
command."



11

The Sentence of Death

But it was an hour before the king re-entered the apartment and in the
meantime the ape-man had occupied himself in examining the carvings
upon the walls and the numerous specimens of the handicraft of
Pal-ul-donian artisans which combined to impart an atmosphere of
richness and luxury to the apartment.

The limestone of the country, close-grained and of marble whiteness yet
worked with comparative ease with crude implements, had been wrought by
cunning craftsmen into bowls and urns and vases of considerable grace
and beauty. Into the carved designs of many of these virgin gold had
been hammered, presenting the effect of a rich and magnificent
cloisonne. A barbarian himself the art of barbarians had always
appealed to the ape-man to whom they represented a natural expression
of man's love of the beautiful to even a greater extent than the
studied and artificial efforts of civilization. Here was the real art
of old masters, the other the cheap imitation of the chromo.

It was while he was thus pleasurably engaged that Ko-tan returned. As
Tarzan, attracted by the movement of the hangings through which the
king entered, turned and faced him he was almost shocked by the
remarkable alteration of the king's appearance. His face was livid; his
hands trembled as with palsy, and his eyes were wide as with fright.
His appearance was one apparently of a combination of consuming anger
and withering fear. Tarzan looked at him questioningly.

"You have had bad news, Ko-tan?" he asked.

The king mumbled an unintelligible reply. Behind there thronged into
the apartment so great a number of warriors that they choked the
entrance-way. The king looked apprehensively to right and left. He cast
terrified glances at the ape-man and then raising his face and turning
his eyes upward he cried: "Jad-ben-Otho be my witness that I do not
this thing of my own accord." There was a moment's silence which was
again broken by Ko-tan. "Seize him," he cried to the warriors about
him, "for Lu-don, the high priest, swears that he is an impostor."

To have offered armed resistance to this great concourse of warriors in
the very heart of the palace of their king would have been worse than
fatal. Already Tarzan had come far by his wits and now that within a
few hours he had had his hopes and his suspicions partially verified by
the vague admissions of O-lo-a he was impressed with the necessity of
inviting no mortal risk that he could avoid.

"Stop!" he cried, raising his palm against them. "What is the meaning
of this?"

"Lu-don claims he has proof that you are not the son of Jad-ben-Otho,"
replied Ko-tan. "He demands that you be brought to the throneroom to
face your accusers. If you are what you claim to be none knows better
than you that you need have no fear in acquiescing to his demands, but
remember always that in such matters the high priest commands the king
and that I am only the bearer of these commands, not their author."

Tarzan saw that Ko-tan was not entirely convinced of his duplicity as
was evidenced by his palpable design to play safe.

"Let not your warriors seize me," he said to Ko-tan, "lest
Jad-ben-Otho, mistaking their intention, strike them dead." The effect
of his words was immediate upon the men in the front rank of those who
faced him, each seeming suddenly to acquire a new modesty that
compelled him to self-effacement behind those directly in his rear--a
modesty that became rapidly contagious.

The ape-man smiled. "Fear not," he said, "I will go willingly to the
audience chamber to face the blasphemers who accuse me."

Arrived at the great throneroom a new complication arose. Ko-tan would
not acknowledge the right of Lu-don to occupy the apex of the pyramid
and Lu-don would not consent to occupying an inferior position while
Tarzan, to remain consistent with his high claims, insisted that no one
should stand above him, but only to the ape-man was the humor of the
situation apparent.

To relieve the situation Ja-don suggested that all three of them occupy
the throne, but this suggestion was repudiated by Ko-tan who argued
that no mortal other than a king of Pal-ul-don had ever sat upon the
high eminence, and that furthermore there was not room for three there.

"But who," said Tarzan, "is my accuser and who is my judge?"

"Lu-don is your accuser," explained Ko-tan.

"And Lu-don is your judge," cried the high priest.

"I am to be judged by him who accuses me then," said Tarzan. "It were
better to dispense then with any formalities and ask Lu-don to sentence
me." His tone was ironical and his sneering face, looking straight into
that of the high priest, but caused the latter's hatred to rise to
still greater proportions.

It was evident that Ko-tan and his warriors saw the justice of Tarzan's
implied objection to this unfair method of dispensing justice. "Only
Ko-tan can judge in the throneroom of his palace," said Ja-don, "let
him hear Lu-don's charges and the testimony of his witnesses, and then
let Ko-tan's judgment be final."

Ko-tan, however, was not particularly enthusiastic over the prospect of
sitting in trial upon one who might after all very possibly be the son
of his god, and so he temporized, seeking for an avenue of escape. "It
is purely a religious matter," he said, "and it is traditional that the
kings of Pal-ul-don interfere not in questions of the church."

"Then let the trial be held in the temple," cried one of the chiefs,
for the warriors were as anxious as their king to be relieved of all
responsibility in the matter. This suggestion was more than
satisfactory to the high priest who inwardly condemned himself for not
having thought of it before.

"It is true," he said, "this man's sin is against the temple.  Let him
be dragged thither then for trial."

"The son of Jad-ben-Otho will be dragged nowhere," cried Tarzan. "But
when this trial is over it is possible that the corpse of Lu-don, the
high priest, will be dragged from the temple of the god he would
desecrate. Think well, then, Lu-don before you commit this folly."

His words, intended to frighten the high priest from his position
failed utterly in consummating their purpose. Lu-don showed no terror
at the suggestion the ape-man's words implied.

"Here is one," thought Tarzan, "who, knowing more of his religion than
any of his fellows, realizes fully the falsity of my claims as he does
the falsity of the faith he preaches."

He realized, however, that his only hope lay in seeming indifference to
the charges. Ko-tan and the warriors were still under the spell of
their belief in him and upon this fact must he depend in the final act
of the drama that Lu-don was staging for his rescue from the jealous
priest whom he knew had already passed sentence upon him in his own
heart.

With a shrug he descended the steps of the pyramid. "It matters not to
Dor-ul-Otho," he said, "where Lu-don enrages his god, for Jad-ben-Otho
can reach as easily into the chambers of the temple as into the
throneroom of Ko-tan."

Immeasurably relieved by this easy solution of their problem the king
and the warriors thronged from the throneroom toward the temple
grounds, their faith in Tarzan increased by his apparent indifference
to the charges against him. Lu-don led them to the largest of the altar
courts.

Taking his place behind the western altar he motioned Ko-tan to a place
upon the platform at the left hand of the altar and directed Tarzan to
a similar place at the right.

As Tarzan ascended the platform his eyes narrowed angrily at the sight
which met them. The basin hollowed in the top of the altar was filled
with water in which floated the naked corpse of a new-born babe. "What
means this?" he cried angrily, turning upon Lu-don.

The latter smiled malevolently. "That you do not know," he replied, "is
but added evidence of the falsity of your claim. He who poses as the
son of god did not know that as the last rays of the setting sun flood
the eastern altar of the temple the lifeblood of an adult reddens the
white stone for the edification of Jad-ben-Otho, and that when the sun
rises again from the body of its maker it looks first upon this western
altar and rejoices in the death of a new-born babe each day, the ghost
of which accompanies it across the heavens by day as the ghost of the
adult returns with it to Jad-ben-Otho at night.

"Even the little children of the Ho-don know these things, while he who
claims to be the son of Jad-ben-Otho knows them not; and if this proof
be not enough, there is more. Come, Waz-don," he cried, pointing to a
tall slave who stood with a group of other blacks and priests on the
temple floor at the left of the altar.

The fellow came forward fearfully. "Tell us what you know of this
creature," cried Lu-don, pointing to Tarzan.

"I have seen him before," said the Waz-don. "I am of the tribe of
Kor-ul-lul, and one day recently a party of which I was one encountered
a few of the warriors of the Kor-ul-JA upon the ridge which separates
our villages. Among the enemy was this strange creature whom they
called Tarzan-jad-guru; and terrible indeed was he for he fought with
the strength of many men so that it required twenty of us to subdue
him. But he did not fight as a god fights, and when a club struck him
upon the head he sank unconscious as might an ordinary mortal.

"We carried him with us to our village as a prisoner but he escaped
after cutting off the head of the warrior we left to guard him and
carrying it down into the gorge and tying it to the branch of a tree
upon the opposite side."

"The word of a slave against that of a god!" cried Ja-don, who had
shown previously a friendly interest in the pseudo godling.

"It is only a step in the progress toward truth," interjected Lu-don.
"Possibly the evidence of the only princess of the house of Ko-tan will
have greater weight with the great chief from the north, though the
father of a son who fled the holy offer of the priesthood may not
receive with willing ears any testimony against another blasphemer."

Ja-don's hand leaped to his knife, but the warriors next him laid
detaining fingers upon his arms. "You are in the temple of
Jad-ben-Otho, Ja-don," they cautioned and the great chief was forced to
swallow Lu-don's affront though it left in his heart bitter hatred of
the high priest.

And now Ko-tan turned toward Lu-don. "What knoweth my daughter of this
matter?" he asked. "You would not bring a princess of my house to
testify thus publicly?"

"No," replied Lu-don, "not in person, but I have here one who will
testify for her." He beckoned to an under priest. "Fetch the slave of
the princess," he said.

His grotesque headdress adding a touch of the hideous to the scene, the
priest stepped forward dragging the reluctant Pan-at-lee by the wrist.

"The Princess O-lo-a was alone in the Forbidden Garden with but this
one slave," explained the priest, "when there suddenly appeared from
the foliage nearby this creature who claims to be the Dor-ul-Otho. When
the slave saw him the princess says that she cried aloud in startled
recognition and called the creature by name--Tarzan-jad-guru--the same
name that the slave from Kor-ul-lul gave him. This woman is not from
Kor-ul-lul but from Kor-ul-JA, the very tribe with which the Kor-ul-lul
says the creature was associating when he first saw him. And further
the princess said that when this woman, whose name is Pan-at-lee, was
brought to her yesterday she told a strange story of having been
rescued from a Tor-o-don in the Kor-ul-GRYF by a creature such as this,
whom she spoke of then as Tarzan-jad-guru; and of how the two were
pursued in the bottom of the gorge by two monster gryfs, and of how the
man led them away while Pan-at-lee escaped, only to be taken prisoner
in the Kor-ul-lul as she was seeking to return to her own tribe.

"Is it not plain now," cried Lu-don, "that this creature is no god. Did
he tell you that he was the son of god?" he almost shouted, turning
suddenly upon Pan-at-lee.

The girl shrank back terrified. "Answer me, slave!" cried the high
priest.

"He seemed more than mortal," parried Pan-at-lee.

"Did he tell you that he was the son of god? Answer my question,"
insisted Lu-don.

"No," she admitted in a low voice, casting an appealing look of
forgiveness at Tarzan who returned a smile of encouragement and
friendship.

"That is no proof that he is not the son of god," cried Ja-don. "Dost
think Jad-ben-Otho goes about crying 'I am god! I am god!' Hast ever
heard him Lu-don? No, you have not. Why should his son do that which
the father does not do?"

"Enough," cried Lu-don. "The evidence is clear. The creature is an
impostor and I, the head priest of Jad-ben-Otho in the city of A-lur,
do condemn him to die." There was a moment's silence during which
Lu-don evidently paused for the dramatic effect of his climax. "And if
I am wrong may Jad-ben-Otho pierce my heart with his lightnings as I
stand here before you all."

The lapping of the wavelets of the lake against the foot of the palace
wall was distinctly audible in the utter and almost breathless silence
which ensued. Lu-don stood with his face turned toward the heavens and
his arms outstretched in the attitude of one who bares his breast to
the dagger of an executioner. The warriors and the priests and the
slaves gathered in the sacred court awaited the consuming vengeance of
their god.

It was Tarzan who broke the silence. "Your god ignores you Lu-don," he
taunted, with a sneer that he meant to still further anger the high
priest, "he ignores you and I can prove it before the eyes of your
priests and your people."

"Prove it, blasphemer! How can you prove it?"

"You have called me a blasphemer," replied Tarzan, "you have proved to
your own satisfaction that I am an impostor, that I, an ordinary
mortal, have posed as the son of god. Demand then that Jad-ben-Otho
uphold his godship and the dignity of his priesthood by directing his
consuming fires through my own bosom."

Again there ensued a brief silence while the onlookers waited for
Lu-don to thus consummate the destruction of this presumptuous impostor.

"You dare not," taunted Tarzan, "for you know that I would be struck
dead no quicker than were you."

"You lie," cried Lu-don, "and I would do it had I not but just received
a message from Jad-ben-Otho directing that your fate be different."

A chorus of admiring and reverential "Ahs" arose from the priesthood.
Ko-tan and his warriors were in a state of mental confusion. Secretly
they hated and feared Lu-don, but so ingrained was their sense of
reverence for the office of the high priest that none dared raise a
voice against him.

None? Well, there was Ja-don, fearless old Lion-man of the north. "The
proposition was a fair one," he cried. "Invoke the lightnings of
Jad-ben-Otho upon this man if you would ever convince us of his guilt."

"Enough of this," snapped Lu-don. "Since when was Ja-don created high
priest? Seize the prisoner," he cried to the priests and warriors, "and
on the morrow he shall die in the manner that Jad-ben-Otho has willed."

There was no immediate movement on the part of any of the warriors to
obey the high priest's command, but the lesser priests on the other
hand, imbued with the courage of fanaticism leaped eagerly forward like
a flock of hideous harpies to seize upon their prey.

The game was up. That Tarzan knew. No longer could cunning and
diplomacy usurp the functions of the weapons of defense he best loved.
And so the first hideous priest who leaped to the platform was
confronted by no suave ambassador from heaven, but rather a grim and
ferocious beast whose temper savored more of hell.

The altar stood close to the western wall of the enclosure.  There was
just room between the two for the high priest to stand during the
performance of the sacrificial ceremonies and only Lu-don stood there
now behind Tarzan, while before him were perhaps two hundred warriors
and priests.

The presumptuous one who would have had the glory of first laying
arresting hands upon the blasphemous impersonator rushed forward with
outstretched hand to seize the ape-man. Instead it was he who was
seized; seized by steel fingers that snapped him up as though he had
been a dummy of straw, grasped him by one leg and the harness at his
back and raised him with giant arms high above the altar. Close at his
heels were others ready to seize the ape-man and drag him down, and
beyond the altar was Lu-don with drawn knife advancing toward him.

There was no instant to waste, nor was it the way of the ape-man to
fritter away precious moments in the uncertainty of belated decision.
Before Lu-don or any other could guess what was in the mind of the
condemned, Tarzan with all the force of his great muscles dashed the
screaming hierophant in the face of the high priest, and, as though the
two actions were one, so quickly did he move, he had leaped to the top
of the altar and from there to a handhold upon the summit of the temple
wall. As he gained a footing there he turned and looked down upon those
beneath. For a moment he stood in silence and then he spoke.

"Who dare believe," he cried, "that Jad-ben-Otho would forsake his
son?" and then he dropped from their sight upon the other side.

There were two at least left within the enclosure whose hearts leaped
with involuntary elation at the success of the ape-man's maneuver, and
one of them smiled openly. This was Ja-don, and the other, Pan-at-lee.

The brains of the priest that Tarzan had thrown at the head of Lu-don
had been dashed out against the temple wall while the high priest
himself had escaped with only a few bruises, sustained in his fall to
the hard pavement. Quickly scrambling to his feet he looked around in
fear, in terror and finally in bewilderment, for he had not been a
witness to the ape-man's escape. "Seize him," he cried; "seize the
blasphemer," and he continued to look around in search of his victim
with such a ridiculous expression of bewilderment that more than a
single warrior was compelled to hide his smiles beneath his palm.

The priests were rushing around wildly, exhorting the warriors to
pursue the fugitive but these awaited now stolidly the command of their
king or high priest. Ko-tan, more or less secretly pleased by the
discomfiture of Lu-don, waited for that worthy to give the necessary
directions which he presently did when one of his acolytes excitedly
explained to him the manner of Tarzan's escape.

Instantly the necessary orders were issued and priests and warriors
sought the temple exit in pursuit of the ape-man. His departing words,
hurled at them from the summit of the temple wall, had had little
effect in impressing the majority that his claims had not been
disproven by Lu-don, but in the hearts of the warriors was admiration
for a brave man and in many the same unholy gratification that had
risen in that of their ruler at the discomfiture of Lu-don.

A careful search of the temple grounds revealed no trace of the quarry.
The secret recesses of the subterranean chambers, familiar only to the
priesthood, were examined by these while the warriors scattered through
the palace and the palace grounds without the temple. Swift runners
were dispatched to the city to arouse the people there that all might
be upon the lookout for Tarzan the Terrible. The story of his imposture
and of his escape, and the tales that the Waz-don slaves had brought
into the city concerning him were soon spread throughout A-lur, nor did
they lose aught in the spreading, so that before an hour had passed the
women and children were hiding behind barred doorways while the
warriors crept apprehensively through the streets expecting momentarily
to be pounced upon by a ferocious demon who, bare-handed, did
victorious battle with huge gryfs and whose lightest pastime consisted
in tearing strong men limb from limb.



12

The Giant Stranger

And while the warriors and the priests of A-lur searched the temple and
the palace and the city for the vanished ape-man there entered the head
of Kor-ul-JA down the precipitous trail from the mountains, a naked
stranger bearing an Enfield upon his back.  Silently he moved downward
toward the bottom of the gorge and there where the ancient trail
unfolded more levelly before him he swung along with easy strides,
though always with the utmost alertness against possible dangers. A
gentle breeze came down from the mountains behind him so that only his
ears and his eyes were of value in detecting the presence of danger
ahead.  Generally the trail followed along the banks of the winding
brooklet at the bottom of the gorge, but in some places where the
waters tumbled over a precipitous ledge the trail made a detour along
the side of the gorge, and again it wound in and out among rocky
outcroppings, and presently where it rounded sharply the projecting
shoulder of a cliff the stranger came suddenly face to face with one
who was ascending the gorge.

Separated by a hundred paces the two halted simultaneously.  Before him
the stranger saw a tall white warrior, naked but for a loin cloth,
cross belts, and a girdle. The man was armed with a heavy, knotted club
and a short knife, the latter hanging in its sheath at his left hip
from the end of one of his cross belts, the opposite belt supporting a
leathern pouch at his right side.  It was Ta-den hunting alone in the
gorge of his friend, the chief of Kor-ul-JA. He contemplated the
stranger with surprise but no wonder, since he recognized in him a
member of the race with which his experience of Tarzan the Terrible had
made him familiar and also, thanks to his friendship for the ape-man,
he looked upon the newcomer without hostility.

The latter was the first to make outward sign of his intentions,
raising his palm toward Ta-den in that gesture which has been a symbol
of peace from pole to pole since man ceased to walk upon his knuckles.
Simultaneously he advanced a few paces and halted.

Ta-den, assuming that one so like Tarzan the Terrible must be a
fellow-tribesman of his lost friend, was more than glad to accept this
overture of peace, the sign of which he returned in kind as he ascended
the trail to where the other stood. "Who are you?" he asked, but the
newcomer only shook his head to indicate that he did not understand.

By signs he tried to carry to the Ho-don the fact that he was following
a trail that had led him over a period of many days from some place
beyond the mountains and Ta-den was convinced that the newcomer sought
Tarzan-jad-guru. He wished, however, that he might discover whether as
friend or foe.

The stranger perceived the Ho-don's prehensile thumbs and great toes
and his long tail with an astonishment which he sought to conceal, but
greater than all was the sense of relief that the first inhabitant of
this strange country whom he had met had proven friendly, so greatly
would he have been handicapped by the necessity for forcing his way
through a hostile land.

Ta-den, who had been hunting for some of the smaller mammals, the meat
of which is especially relished by the Ho-don, forgot his intended
sport in the greater interest of his new discovery. He would take the
stranger to Om-at and possibly together the two would find some way of
discovering the true intentions of the newcomer. And so again through
signs he apprised the other that he would accompany him and together
they descended toward the cliffs of Om-at's people.

As they approached these they came upon the women and children working
under guard of the old men and the youths--gathering the wild fruits
and herbs which constitute a part of their diet, as well as tending the
small acres of growing crops which they cultivate. The fields lay in
small level patches that had been cleared of trees and brush. Their
farm implements consisted of metal-shod poles which bore a closer
resemblance to spears than to tools of peaceful agriculture.
Supplementing these were others with flattened blades that were neither
hoes nor spades, but instead possessed the appearance of an unhappy
attempt to combine the two implements in one.

At first sight of these people the stranger halted and unslung his bow
for these creatures were black as night, their bodies entirely covered
with hair. But Ta-den, interpreting the doubt in the other's mind,
reassured him with a gesture and a smile. The Waz-don, however,
gathered around excitedly jabbering questions in a language which the
stranger discovered his guide understood though it was entirely
unintelligible to the former. They made no attempt to molest him and he
was now sure that he had fallen among a peaceful and friendly people.

It was but a short distance now to the caves and when they reached
these Ta-den led the way aloft upon the wooden pegs, assured that this
creature whom he had discovered would have no more difficulty in
following him than had Tarzan the Terrible.  Nor was he mistaken for
the other mounted with ease until presently the two stood within the
recess before the cave of Om-at, the chief.

The latter was not there and it was mid-afternoon before he returned,
but in the meantime many warriors came to look upon the visitor and in
each instance the latter was more thoroughly impressed with the
friendly and peaceable spirit of his hosts, little guessing that he was
being entertained by a ferocious and warlike tribe who never before the
coming of Ta-den and Tarzan had suffered a stranger among them.

At last Om-at returned and the guest sensed intuitively that he was in
the presence of a great man among these people, possibly a chief or
king, for not only did the attitude of the other black warriors
indicate this but it was written also in the mien and bearing of the
splendid creature who stood looking at him while Ta-den explained the
circumstances of their meeting. "And I believe, Om-at," concluded the
Ho-don, "that he seeks Tarzan the Terrible."

At the sound of that name, the first intelligible word that had fallen
upon the ears of the stranger since he had come among them, his face
lightened. "Tarzan!" he cried, "Tarzan of the Apes!" and by signs he
tried to tell them that it was he whom he sought.

They understood, and also they guessed from the expression of his face
that he sought Tarzan from motives of affection rather than the
reverse, but of this Om-at wished to make sure. He pointed to the
stranger's knife, and repeating Tarzan's name, seized Ta-den and
pretended to stab him, immediately turning questioningly toward the
stranger.

The latter shook his head vehemently and then first placing a hand
above his heart he raised his palm in the symbol of peace.

"He is a friend of Tarzan-jad-guru," exclaimed Ta-den.

"Either a friend or a great liar," replied Om-at.

"Tarzan," continued the stranger, "you know him? He lives? O God, if I
could only speak your language." And again reverting to sign language
he sought to ascertain where Tarzan was. He would pronounce the name
and point in different directions, in the cave, down into the gorge,
back toward the mountains, or out upon the valley below, and each time
he would raise his brows questioningly and voice the universal "eh?" of
interrogation which they could not fail to understand. But always Om-at
shook his head and spread his palms in a gesture which indicated that
while he understood the question he was ignorant as to the whereabouts
of the ape-man, and then the black chief attempted as best he might to
explain to the stranger what he knew of the whereabouts of Tarzan.

He called the newcomer Jar-don, which in the language of Pal-ul-don
means "stranger," and he pointed to the sun and said _as_. This he
repeated several times and then he held up one hand with the fingers
outspread and touching them one by one, including the thumb, repeated
the word adenen until the stranger understood that he meant five. Again
he pointed to the sun and describing an arc with his forefinger
starting at the eastern horizon and terminating at the western, he
repeated again the words as adenen. It was plain to the stranger that
the words meant that the sun had crossed the heavens five times. In
other words, five days had passed. Om-at then pointed to the cave where
they stood, pronouncing Tarzan's name and imitating a walking man with
the first and second fingers of his right hand upon the floor of the
recess, sought to show that Tarzan had walked out of the cave and
climbed upward on the pegs five days before, but this was as far as the
sign language would permit him to go.

This far the stranger followed him and, indicating that he understood
he pointed to himself and then indicating the pegs leading above
announced that he would follow Tarzan.

"Let us go with him," said Om-at, "for as yet we have not punished the
Kor-ul-lul for killing our friend and ally."

"Persuade him to wait until morning," said Ta-den, "that you may take
with you many warriors and make a great raid upon the Kor-ul-lul, and
this time, Om-at, do not kill your prisoners.  Take as many as you can
alive and from some of them we may learn the fate of Tarzan-jad-guru."

"Great is the wisdom of the Ho-don," replied Om-at. "It shall be as you
say, and having made prisoners of all the Kor-ul-lul we shall make them
tell us what we wish to know. And then we shall march them to the rim
of Kor-ul-GRYF and push them over the edge of the cliff."

Ta-den smiled. He knew that they would not take prisoner all the
Kor-ul-lul warriors--that they would be fortunate if they took one and
it was also possible that they might even be driven back in defeat, but
he knew too that Om-at would not hesitate to carry out his threat if he
had the opportunity, so implacable was the hatred of these neighbors
for each other.

It was not difficult to explain Om-at's plan to the stranger or to win
his consent since he was aware, when the great black had made it plain
that they would be accompanied by many warriors, that their venture
would probably lead them into a hostile country and every safeguard
that he could employ he was glad to avail himself of, since the
furtherance of his quest was the paramount issue.

He slept that night upon a pile of furs in one of the compartments of
Om-at's ancestral cave, and early the next day following the morning
meal they sallied forth, a hundred savage warriors swarming up the face
of the sheer cliff and out upon the summit of the ridge, the main body
preceded by two warriors whose duties coincided with those of the point
of modern military maneuvers, safeguarding the column against the
danger of too sudden contact with the enemy.

Across the ridge they went and down into the Kor-ul-lul and there
almost immediately they came upon a lone and unarmed Waz-don who was
making his way fearfully up the gorge toward the village of his tribe.
Him they took prisoner which, strangely, only added to his terror since
from the moment that he had seen them and realized that escape was
impossible, he had expected to be slain immediately.

"Take him back to Kor-ul-JA," said Om-at, to one of his warriors, "and
hold him there unharmed until I return."

And so the puzzled Kor-ul-lul was led away while the savage company
moved stealthily from tree to tree in its closer advance upon the
village. Fortune smiled upon Om-at in that it gave him quickly what he
sought--a battle royal, for they had not yet come in sight of the caves
of the Kor-ul-lul when they encountered a considerable band of warriors
headed down the gorge upon some expedition.

Like shadows the Kor-ul-JA melted into the concealment of the foliage
upon either side of the trail. Ignorant of impending danger, safe in
the knowledge that they trod their own domain where each rock and stone
was as familiar as the features of their mates, the Kor-ul-lul walked
innocently into the ambush.  Suddenly the quiet of that seeming peace
was shattered by a savage cry and a hurled club felled a Kor-ul-lul.

The cry was a signal for a savage chorus from a hundred Kor-ul-JA
throats with which were soon mingled the war cries of their enemies.
The air was filled with flying clubs and then as the two forces
mingled, the battle resolved itself into a number of individual
encounters as each warrior singled out a foe and closed upon him.
Knives gleamed and flashed in the mottling sunlight that filtered
through the foliage of the trees above.  Sleek black coats were
streaked with crimson stains.

In the thick of the fight the smooth brown skin of the stranger mingled
with the black bodies of friend and foe. Only his keen eyes and his
quick wit had shown him how to differentiate between Kor-ul-lul and
Kor-ul-JA since with the single exception of apparel they were
identical, but at the first rush of the enemy he had noticed that their
loin cloths were not of the leopard-matted hides such as were worn by
his allies.

Om-at, after dispatching his first antagonist, glanced at Jar-don. "He
fights with the ferocity of JATO," mused the chief.  "Powerful indeed
must be the tribe from which he and Tarzan-jad-guru come," and then his
whole attention was occupied by a new assailant.

The fighters surged to and fro through the forest until those who
survived were spent with exhaustion. All but the stranger who seemed
not to know the sense of fatigue. He fought on when each new antagonist
would have gladly quit, and when there were no more Kor-ul-lul who were
not engaged, he leaped upon those who stood pantingly facing the
exhausted Kor-ul-JA.

And always he carried upon his back the peculiar thing which Om-at had
thought was some manner of strange weapon but the purpose of which he
could not now account for in view of the fact that Jar-don never used
it, and that for the most part it seemed but a nuisance and needless
encumbrance since it banged and smashed against its owner as he leaped,
catlike, hither and thither in the course of his victorious duels. The
bow and arrows he had tossed aside at the beginning of the fight but
the Enfield he would not discard, for where he went he meant that it
should go until its mission had been fulfilled.

Presently the Kor-ul-JA, seemingly shamed by the example of Jar-don
closed once more with the enemy, but the latter, moved no doubt to
terror by the presence of the stranger, a tireless demon who appeared
invulnerable to their attacks, lost heart and sought to flee. And then
it was that at Om-at's command his warriors surrounded a half-dozen of
the most exhausted and made them prisoners.

It was a tired, bloody, and elated company that returned victorious to
the Kor-ul-JA. Twenty of their number were carried back and six of
these were dead men. It was the most glorious and successful raid that
the Kor-ul-JA had made upon the Kor-ul-lul in the memory of man, and it
marked Om-at as the greatest of chiefs, but that fierce warrior knew
that advantage had lain upon his side largely because of the presence
of his strange ally. Nor did he hesitate to give credit where credit
belonged, with the result that Jar-don and his exploits were upon the
tongue of every member of the tribe of Kor-ul-JA and great was the fame
of the race that could produce two such as he and Tarzan-jad-guru.

And in the gorge of Kor-ul-lul beyond the ridge the survivors spoke in
bated breath of this second demon that had joined forces with their
ancient enemy.

Returned to his cave Om-at caused the Kor-ul-lul prisoners to be
brought into his presence singly, and each he questioned as to the fate
of Tarzan. Without exception they told him the same story--that Tarzan
had been taken prisoner by them five days before but that he had slain
the warrior left to guard him and escaped, carrying the head of the
unfortunate sentry to the opposite side of Kor-ul-lul where he had left
it suspended by its hair from the branch of a tree. But what had become
of him after, they did not know; not one of them, until the last
prisoner was examined, he whom they had taken first--the unarmed
Kor-ul-lul making his way from the direction of the Valley of
Jad-ben-Otho toward the caves of his people.

This one, when he discovered the purpose of their questioning, bartered
with them for the lives and liberty of himself and his fellows. "I can
tell you much of this terrible man of whom you ask, Kor-ul-JA," he
said. "I saw him yesterday and I know where he is, and if you will
promise to let me and my fellows return in safety to the caves of our
ancestors I will tell you all, and truthfully, that which I know."

"You will tell us anyway," replied Om-at, "or we shall kill you."

"You will kill me anyway," retorted the prisoner, "unless you make me
this promise; so if I am to be killed the thing I know shall go with
me."

"He is right, Om-at," said Ta-den, "promise him that they shall have
their liberty."

"Very well," said Om-at. "Speak Kor-ul-lul, and when you have told me
all, you and your fellows may return unharmed to your tribe."

"It was thus," commenced the prisoner. "Three days since I was hunting
with a party of my fellows near the mouth of Kor-ul-lul not far from
where you captured me this morning, when we were surprised and set upon
by a large number of Ho-don who took us prisoners and carried us to
A-lur where a few were chosen to be slaves and the rest were cast into
a chamber beneath the temple where are held for sacrifice the victims
that are offered by the Ho-don to Jad-ben-Otho upon the sacrificial
altars of the temple at A-lur.

"It seemed then that indeed was my fate sealed and that lucky were
those who had been selected for slaves among the Ho-don, for they at
least might hope to escape--those in the chamber with me must be
without hope.

"But yesterday a strange thing happened. There came to the temple,
accompanied by all the priests and by the king and many of his
warriors, one whom all did great reverence, and when he came to the
barred gateway leading to the chamber in which we wretched ones awaited
our fate, I saw to my surprise that it was none other than that
terrible man who had so recently been a prisoner in the village of
Kor-ul-lul--he whom you call Tarzan-jad-guru but whom they addressed as
Dor-ul-Otho. And he looked upon us and questioned the high priest and
when he was told of the purpose for which we were imprisoned there he
grew angry and cried that it was not the will of Jad-ben-Otho that his
people be thus sacrificed, and he commanded the high priest to liberate
us, and this was done.

"The Ho-don prisoners were permitted to return to their homes and we
were led beyond the City of A-lur and set upon our way toward
Kor-ul-lul. There were three of us, but many are the dangers that lie
between A-lur and Kor-ul-lul and we were only three and unarmed.
Therefore none of us reached the village of our people and only one of
us lives. I have spoken."

"That is all you know concerning Tarzan-jad-guru?" asked Om-at.

"That is all I know," replied the prisoner, "other than that he whom
they call Lu-don, the high priest at A-lur, was very angry, and that
one of the two priests who guided us out of the city said to the other
that the stranger was not Dor-ul-Otho at all; that Lu-don had said so
and that he had also said that he would expose him and that he should
be punished with death for his presumption. That is all they said
within my hearing.

"And now, chief of Kor-ul-JA, let us depart."

Om-at nodded. "Go your way," he said, "and Ab-on, send warriors to
guard them until they are safely within the Kor-ul-lul.

"Jar-don," he said beckoning to the stranger, "come with me," and
rising he led the way toward the summit of the cliff, and when they
stood upon the ridge Om-at pointed down into the valley toward the City
of A-lur gleaming in the light of the western sun.

"There is Tarzan-jad-guru," he said, and Jar-don understood.



13

The Masquerader

As Tarzan dropped to the ground beyond the temple wall there was in his
mind no intention to escape from the City of A-lur until he had
satisfied himself that his mate was not a prisoner there, but how, in
this strange city in which every man's hand must be now against him, he
was to live and prosecute his search was far from clear to him.

There was only one place of which he knew that he might find even
temporary sanctuary and that was the Forbidden Garden of the king.
There was thick shrubbery in which a man might hide, and water and
fruits. A cunning jungle creature, if he could reach the spot
unsuspected, might remain concealed there for a considerable time, but
how he was to traverse the distance between the temple grounds and the
garden unseen was a question the seriousness of which he fully
appreciated.

"Mighty is Tarzan," he soliloquized, "in his native jungle, but in the
cities of man he is little better than they."

Depending upon his keen observation and sense of location he felt safe
in assuming that he could reach the palace grounds by means of the
subterranean corridors and chambers of the temple through which he had
been conducted the day before, nor any slightest detail of which had
escaped his keen eyes. That would be better, he reasoned, than crossing
the open grounds above where his pursuers would naturally immediately
follow him from the temple and quickly discover him.

And so a dozen paces from the temple wall he disappeared from sight of
any chance observer above, down one of the stone stairways that led to
the apartments beneath. The way that he had been conducted the previous
day had followed the windings and turnings of numerous corridors and
apartments, but Tarzan, sure of himself in such matters, retraced the
route accurately without hesitation.

He had little fear of immediate apprehension here since he believed
that all the priests of the temple had assembled in the court above to
witness his trial and his humiliation and his death, and with this idea
firmly implanted in his mind he rounded the turn of the corridor and
came face to face with an under priest, his grotesque headdress
concealing whatever emotion the sight of Tarzan may have aroused.

However, Tarzan had one advantage over the masked votary of
Jad-ben-Otho in that the moment he saw the priest he knew his intention
concerning him, and therefore was not compelled to delay action. And so
it was that before the priest could determine on any suitable line of
conduct in the premises a long, keen knife had been slipped into his
heart.

As the body lunged toward the floor Tarzan caught it and snatched the
headdress from its shoulders, for the first sight of the creature had
suggested to his ever-alert mind a bold scheme for deceiving his
enemies.

The headdress saved from such possible damage as it must have sustained
had it fallen to the floor with the body of its owner, Tarzan
relinquished his hold upon the corpse, set the headdress carefully upon
the floor and stooping down severed the tail of the Ho-don close to its
root. Near by at his right was a small chamber from which the priest
had evidently just emerged and into this Tarzan dragged the corpse, the
headdress, and the tail.

Quickly cutting a thin strip of hide from the loin cloth of the priest,
Tarzan tied it securely about the upper end of the severed member and
then tucking the tail under his loin cloth behind him, secured it in
place as best he could. Then he fitted the headdress over his shoulders
and stepped from the apartment, to all appearances a priest of the
temple of Jad-ben-Otho unless one examined too closely his thumbs and
his great toes.

He had noticed that among both the Ho-don and the Waz-don it was not at
all unusual that the end of the tail be carried in one hand, and so he
caught his own tail up thus lest the lifeless appearance of it dragging
along behind him should arouse suspicion.

Passing along the corridor and through the various chambers he emerged
at last into the palace grounds beyond the temple. The pursuit had not
yet reached this point though he was conscious of a commotion not far
behind him. He met now both warriors and slaves but none gave him more
than a passing glance, a priest being too common a sight about the
palace.

And so, passing the guards unchallenged, he came at last to the inner
entrance to the Forbidden Garden and there he paused and scanned
quickly that portion of the beautiful spot that lay before his eyes. To
his relief it seemed unoccupied and congratulating himself upon the
ease with which he had so far outwitted the high powers of A-lur he
moved rapidly to the opposite end of the enclosure. Here he found a
patch of flowering shrubbery that might safely have concealed a dozen
men.

Crawling well within he removed the uncomfortable headdress and sat
down to await whatever eventualities fate might have in store for him
the while he formulated plans for the future. The one night that he had
spent in A-lur had kept him up to a late hour, apprising him of the
fact that while there were few abroad in the temple grounds at night,
there were yet enough to make it possible for him to fare forth under
cover of his disguise without attracting the unpleasant attention of
the guards, and, too, he had noticed that the priesthood constituted a
privileged class that seemed to come and go at will and unchallenged
throughout the palace as well as the temple. Altogether then, he
decided, night furnished the most propitious hours for his
investigation--by day he could lie up in the shrubbery of the Forbidden
Garden, reasonably free from detection. From beyond the garden he heard
the voices of men calling to one another both far and near, and he
guessed that diligent was the search that was being prosecuted for him.

The idle moments afforded him an opportunity to evolve a more
satisfactory scheme for attaching his stolen caudal appendage. He
arranged it in such a way that it might be quickly assumed or
discarded, and this done he fell to examining the weird mask that had
so effectively hidden his features.

The thing had been very cunningly wrought from a single block of wood,
very probably a section of a tree, upon which the features had been
carved and afterward the interior hollowed out until only a
comparatively thin shell remained. Two-semicircular notches had been
rounded out from opposite sides of the lower edge. These fitted snugly
over his shoulders, aprons of wood extending downward a few inches upon
his chest and back. From these aprons hung long tassels or switches of
hair tapering from the outer edges toward the center which reached
below the bottom of his torso. It required but the most cursory
examination to indicate to the ape-man that these ornaments consisted
of human scalps, taken, doubtless, from the heads of the sacrifices
upon the eastern altars. The headdress itself had been carved to depict
in formal design a hideous face that suggested both man and GRYF. There
were the three white horns, the yellow face with the blue bands
encircling the eyes and the red hood which took the form of the
posterior and anterior aprons.

As Tarzan sat within the concealing foliage of the shrubbery meditating
upon the hideous priest-mask which he held in his hands he became aware
that he was not alone in the garden. He sensed another presence and
presently his trained ears detected the slow approach of naked feet
across the sward. At first he suspected that it might be one stealthily
searching the Forbidden Garden for him but a little later the figure
came within the limited area of his vision which was circumscribed by
stems and foliage and flowers. He saw then that it was the princess
O-lo-a and that she was alone and walking with bowed head as though in
meditation--sorrowful meditation for there were traces of tears upon
her lids.

Shortly after his ears warned him that others had entered the
garden--men they were and their footsteps proclaimed that they walked
neither slowly nor meditatively. They came directly toward the princess
and when Tarzan could see them he discovered that both were priests.

"O-lo-a, Princess of Pal-ul-don," said one, addressing her, "the
stranger who told us that he was the son of Jad-ben-Otho has but just
fled from the wrath of Lu-don, the high priest, who exposed him and all
his wicked blasphemy. The temple, and the palace, and the city are
being searched and we have been sent to search the Forbidden Garden,
since Ko-tan, the king, said that only this morning he found him here,
though how he passed the guards he could not guess."

"He is not here," said O-lo-a. "I have been in the garden for some time
and have seen nor heard no other than myself. However, search it if you
will."

"No," said the priest who had before spoken, "it is not necessary since
he could not have entered without your knowledge and the connivance of
the guards, and even had he, the priest who preceded us must have seen
him."

"What priest?" asked O-lo-a.

"One passed the guards shortly before us," explained the man.

"I did not see him," said O-lo-a.

"Doubtless he left by another exit," remarked the second priest.

"Yes, doubtless," acquiesced O-lo-a, "but it is strange that I did not
see him." The two priests made their obeisance and turned to depart.

"Stupid as Buto, the rhinoceros," soliloquized Tarzan, who considered
Buto a very stupid creature indeed. "It should be easy to outwit such
as these."

The priests had scarce departed when there came the sound of feet
running rapidly across the garden in the direction of the princess to
an accompaniment of rapid breathing as of one almost spent, either from
fatigue or excitement.

"Pan-at-lee," exclaimed O-lo-a, "what has happened? You look as
terrified as the doe for which you were named!"

"O Princess of Pal-ul-don," cried Pan-at-lee, "they would have killed
him in the temple. They would have killed the wondrous stranger who
claimed to be the Dor-ul-Otho."

"But he escaped," said O-lo-a. "You were there. Tell me about it."

"The head priest would have had him seized and slain, but when they
rushed upon him he hurled one in the face of Lu-don with the same ease
that you might cast your breastplates at me, and then he leaped upon
the altar and from there to the top of the temple wall and disappeared
below. They are searching for him, but, O Princess, I pray that they do
not find him."

"And why do you pray that?" asked O-lo-a. "Has not one who has so
blasphemed earned death?"

"Ah, but you do not know him," replied Pan-at-lee.

"And you do, then?" retorted O-lo-a quickly. "This morning you betrayed
yourself and then attempted to deceive me. The slaves of O-lo-a do not
such things with impunity. He is then the same Tarzan-jad-guru of whom
you told me? Speak woman and speak only the truth."

Pan-at-lee drew herself up very erect, her little chin held high, for
was not she too among her own people already as good as a princess?
"Pan-at-lee, the Kor-ul-JA does not lie," she said, "to protect
herself."

"Then tell me what you know of this Tarzan-jad-guru," insisted O-lo-a.

"I know that he is a wondrous man and very brave," said Pan-at-lee,
"and that he saved me from the Tor-o-don and the GRYF as I told you,
and that he is indeed the same who came into the garden this morning;
and even now I do not know that he is not the son of Jad-ben-Otho for
his courage and his strength are more than those of mortal man, as are
also his kindness and his honor: for when he might have harmed me he
protected me, and when he might have saved himself he thought only of
me. And all this he did because of his friendship for Om-at, who is
gund of Kor-ul-JA and with whom I should have mated had the Ho-don not
captured me."

"He was indeed a wonderful man to look upon," mused O-lo-a, "and he was
not as are other men, not alone in the conformation of his hands and
feet or the fact that he was tailless, but there was that about him
which made him seem different in ways more important than these."

"And," supplemented Pan-at-lee, her savage little heart loyal to the
man who had befriended her and hoping to win for him the consideration
of the princess even though it might not avail him; "and," she said,
"did he not know all about Ta-den and even his whereabouts. Tell me, O
Princess, could mortal know such things as these?"

"Perhaps he saw Ta-den," suggested O-lo-a.

"But how would he know that you loved Ta-den," parried Pan-at-lee. "I
tell you, my Princess, that if he is not a god he is at least more than
Ho-don or Waz-don. He followed me from the cave of Es-sat in Kor-ul-JA
across Kor-ul-lul and two wide ridges to the very cave in Kor-ul-GRYF
where I hid, though many hours had passed since I had come that way and
my bare feet left no impress upon the ground. What mortal man could do
such things as these? And where in all Pal-ul-don would virgin maid
find friend and protector in a strange male other than he?"

"Perhaps Lu-don may be mistaken--perhaps he is a god," said O-lo-a,
influenced by her slave's enthusiastic championing of the stranger.

"But whether god or man he is too wonderful to die," cried Pan-at-lee.
"Would that I might save him. If he lived he might even find a way to
give you your Ta-den, Princess."

"Ah, if he only could," sighed O-lo-a, "but alas it is too late for
tomorrow I am to be given to Bu-lot."

"He who came to your quarters yesterday with your father?" asked
Pan-at-lee.

"Yes; the one with the awful round face and the big belly," exclaimed
the Princess disgustedly. "He is so lazy he will neither hunt nor
fight. To eat and to drink is all that Bu-lot is fit for, and he thinks
of naught else except these things and his slave women. But come,
Pan-at-lee, gather for me some of these beautiful blossoms. I would
have them spread around my couch tonight that I may carry away with me
in the morning the memory of the fragrance that I love best and which I
know that I shall not find in the village of Mo-sar, the father of
Bu-lot. I will help you, Pan-at-lee, and we will gather armfuls of
them, for I love to gather them as I love nothing else--they were
Ta-den's favorite flowers."

The two approached the flowering shrubbery where Tarzan hid, but as the
blooms grew plentifully upon every bush the ape-man guessed there would
be no necessity for them to enter the patch far enough to discover him.
With little exclamations of pleasure as they found particularly large
or perfect blooms the two moved from place to place upon the outskirts
of Tarzan's retreat.

"Oh, look, Pan-at-lee," cried O-lo-a presently; "there is the king of
them all. Never did I see so wonderful a flower--No! I will get it
myself--it is so large and wonderful no other hand shall touch it," and
the princess wound in among the bushes toward the point where the great
flower bloomed upon a bush above the ape-man's head.

So sudden and unexpected her approach that there was no opportunity to
escape and Tarzan sat silently trusting that fate might be kind to him
and lead Ko-tan's daughter away before her eyes dropped from the
high-growing bloom to him. But as the girl cut the long stem with her
knife she looked down straight into the smiling face of Tarzan-jad-guru.

With a stifled scream she drew back and the ape-man rose and faced her.

"Have no fear, Princess," he assured her. "It is the friend of Ta-den
who salutes you," raising her fingers to his lips.

Pan-at-lee came now excitedly forward. "O Jad-ben-Otho, it is he!"

"And now that you have found me," queried Tarzan, "will you give me up
to Lu-don, the high priest?"

Pan-at-lee threw herself upon her knees at O-lo-a's feet.  "Princess!
Princess!" she beseeched, "do not discover him to his enemies."

"But Ko-tan, my father," whispered O-lo-a fearfully, "if he knew of my
perfidy his rage would be beyond naming. Even though I am a princess
Lu-don might demand that I be sacrificed to appease the wrath of
Jad-ben-Otho, and between the two of them I should be lost."

"But they need never know," cried Pan-at-lee, "that you have seen him
unless you tell them yourself for as Jad-ben-Otho is my witness I will
never betray you."

"Oh, tell me, stranger," implored O-lo-a, "are you indeed a god?"

"Jad-ben-Otho is not more so," replied Tarzan truthfully.

"But why do you seek to escape then from the hands of mortals if you
are a god?" she asked.

"When gods mingle with mortals," replied Tarzan, "they are no less
vulnerable than mortals. Even Jad-ben-Otho, should he appear before you
in the flesh, might be slain."

"You have seen Ta-den and spoken with him?" she asked with apparent
irrelevancy.

"Yes, I have seen him and spoken with him," replied the ape-man. "For
the duration of a moon I was with him constantly."

"And--" she hesitated--"he--" she cast her eyes toward the ground and a
flush mantled her cheek--"he still loves me?" and Tarzan knew that she
had been won over.

"Yes," he said, "Ta-den speaks only of O-lo-a and he waits and hopes
for the day when he can claim her."

"But tomorrow they give me to Bu-lot," she said sadly.

"May it be always tomorrow," replied Tarzan, "for tomorrow never comes."

"Ah, but this unhappiness will come, and for all the tomorrows of my
life I must pine in misery for the Ta-den who will never be mine."

"But for Lu-don I might have helped you," said the ape-man. "And who
knows that I may not help you yet?"

"Ah, if you only could, Dor-ul-Otho," cried the girl, "and I know that
you would if it were possible for Pan-at-lee has told me how brave you
are, and at the same time how kind."

"Only Jad-ben-Otho knows what the future may bring," said Tarzan. "And
now you two go your way lest someone should discover you and become
suspicious."

"We will go," said O-lo-a, "but Pan-at-lee will return with food. I
hope that you escape and that Jad-ben-Otho is pleased with what I have
done." She turned and walked away and Pan-at-lee followed while the
ape-man again resumed his hiding.

At dusk Pan-at-lee came with food and having her alone Tarzan put the
question that he had been anxious to put since his conversation earlier
in the day with O-lo-a.

"Tell me," he said, "what you know of the rumors of which O-lo-a spoke
of the mysterious stranger which is supposed to be hidden in A-lur.
Have you too heard of this during the short time that you have been
here?"

"Yes," said Pan-at-lee, "I have heard it spoken of among the other
slaves. It is something of which all whisper among themselves but of
which none dares to speak aloud. They say that there is a strange she
hidden in the temple and that Lu-don wants her for a priestess and that
Ko-tan wants her for a wife and that neither as yet dares take her for
fear of the other."

"Do you know where she is hidden in the temple?" asked Tarzan.

"No," said Pan-at-lee. "How should I know? I do not even know that it
is more than a story and I but tell you that which I have heard others
say."

"There was only one," asked Tarzan, "whom they spoke of?"

"No, they speak of another who came with her but none seems to know
what became of this one."

Tarzan nodded. "Thank you Pan-at-lee," he said. "You may have helped me
more than either of us guess."

"I hope that I have helped you," said the girl as she turned back
toward the palace.

"And I hope so too," exclaimed Tarzan emphatically.



14

The Temple of the Gryf

When night had fallen Tarzan donned the mask and the dead tail of the
priest he had slain in the vaults beneath the temple. He judged that it
would not do to attempt again to pass the guard, especially so late at
night as it would be likely to arouse comment and suspicion, and so he
swung into the tree that overhung the garden wall and from its branches
dropped to the ground beyond.

Avoiding too grave risk of apprehension the ape-man passed through the
grounds to the court of the palace, approaching the temple from the
side opposite to that at which he had left it at the time of his
escape. He came thus it is true through a portion of the grounds with
which he was unfamiliar but he preferred this to the danger of
following the beaten track between the palace apartments and those of
the temple. Having a definite goal in mind and endowed as he was with
an almost miraculous sense of location he moved with great assurance
through the shadows of the temple yard.

Taking advantage of the denser shadows close to the walls and of what
shrubs and trees there were he came without mishap at last to the
ornate building concerning the purpose of which he had asked Lu-don
only to be put off with the assertion that it was forgotten--nothing
strange in itself but given possible importance by the apparent
hesitancy of the priest to discuss its use and the impression the
ape-man had gained at the time that Lu-don lied.

And now he stood at last alone before the structure which was three
stories in height and detached from all the other temple buildings. It
had a single barred entrance which was carved from the living rock in
representation of the head of a GRYF, whose wide-open mouth constituted
the doorway. The head, hood, and front paws of the creature were
depicted as though it lay crouching with its lower jaw on the ground
between its outspread paws. Small oval windows, which were likewise
barred, flanked the doorway.

Seeing that the coast was clear, Tarzan stepped into the darkened
entrance where he tried the bars only to discover that they were
ingeniously locked in place by some device with which he was unfamiliar
and that they also were probably too strong to be broken even if he
could have risked the noise which would have resulted. Nothing was
visible within the darkened interior and so, momentarily baffled, he
sought the windows. Here also the bars refused to yield up their
secret, but again Tarzan was not dismayed since he had counted upon
nothing different.

If the bars would not yield to his cunning they would yield to his
giant strength if there proved no other means of ingress, but first he
would assure himself that this latter was the case.  Moving entirely
around the building he examined it carefully.  There were other windows
but they were similarly barred. He stopped often to look and listen but
he saw no one and the sounds that he heard were too far away to cause
him any apprehension.

He glanced above him at the wall of the building. Like so many of the
other walls of the city, palace, and temple, it was ornately carved and
there were too the peculiar ledges that ran sometimes in a horizontal
plane and again were tilted at an angle, giving ofttimes an impression
of irregularity and even crookedness to the buildings. It was not a
difficult wall to climb, at least not difficult for the ape-man.

But he found the bulky and awkward headdress a considerable handicap
and so he laid it aside upon the ground at the foot of the wall. Nimbly
he ascended to find the windows of the second floor not only barred but
curtained within. He did not delay long at the second floor since he
had in mind an idea that he would find the easiest entrance through the
roof which he had noticed was roughly dome shaped like the throneroom
of Ko-tan. Here there were apertures. He had seen them from the ground,
and if the construction of the interior resembled even slightly that of
the throneroom, bars would not be necessary upon these apertures, since
no one could reach them from the floor of the room.

There was but a single question: would they be large enough to admit
the broad shoulders of the ape-man.

He paused again at the third floor, and here, in spite of the hangings,
he saw that the interior was lighted and simultaneously there came to
his nostrils from within a scent that stripped from him temporarily any
remnant of civilization that might have remained and left him a fierce
and terrible bull of the jungles of Kerchak. So sudden and complete was
the metamorphosis that there almost broke from the savage lips the
hideous challenge of his kind, but the cunning brute-mind saved him
this blunder.

And now he heard voices within--the voice of Lu-don he could have
sworn, demanding. And haughty and disdainful came the answering words
though utter hopelessness spoke in the tones of this other voice which
brought Tarzan to the pinnacle of frenzy.

The dome with its possible apertures was forgotten. Every consideration
of stealth and quiet was cast aside as the ape-man drew back his mighty
fist and struck a single terrific blow upon the bars of the small
window before him, a blow that sent the bars and the casing that held
them clattering to the floor of the apartment within.

Instantly Tarzan dove headforemost through the aperture carrying the
hangings of antelope hide with him to the floor below.  Leaping to his
feet he tore the entangling pelt from about his head only to find
himself in utter darkness and in silence. He called aloud a name that
had not passed his lips for many weary months. "Jane, Jane," he cried,
"where are you?" But there was only silence in reply.

Again and again he called, groping with outstretched hands through the
Stygian blackness of the room, his nostrils assailed and his brain
tantalized by the delicate effluvia that had first assured him that his
mate had been within this very room. And he had heard her dear voice
combatting the base demands of the vile priest. Ah, if he had but acted
with greater caution! If he had but continued to move with quiet and
stealth he might even at this moment be holding her in his arms while
the body of Lu-don, beneath his foot, spoke eloquently of vengeance
achieved. But there was no time now for idle self-reproaches.

He stumbled blindly forward, groping for he knew not what till suddenly
the floor beneath him tilted and he shot downward into a darkness even
more utter than that above. He felt his body strike a smooth surface
and he realized that he was hurtling downward as through a polished
chute while from above there came the mocking tones of a taunting laugh
and the voice of Lu-don screamed after him: "Return to thy father, O
Dor-ul-Otho!"

The ape-man came to a sudden and painful stop upon a rocky floor.
Directly before him was an oval window crossed by many bars, and beyond
he saw the moonlight playing on the waters of the blue lake below.
Simultaneously he was conscious of a familiar odor in the air of the
chamber, which a quick glance revealed in the semidarkness as of
considerable proportion.

It was the faint, but unmistakable odor of the GRYF, and now Tarzan
stood silently listening. At first he detected no sounds other than
those of the city that came to him through the window overlooking the
lake; but presently, faintly, as though from a distance he heard the
shuffling of padded feet along a stone pavement, and as he listened he
was aware that the sound approached.

Nearer and nearer it came, and now even the breathing of the beast was
audible. Evidently attracted by the noise of his descent into its
cavernous retreat it was approaching to investigate. He could not see
it but he knew that it was not far distant, and then, deafeningly there
reverberated through those gloomy corridors the mad bellow of the GRYF.

Aware of the poor eyesight of the beast, and his own eyes now grown
accustomed to the darkness of the cavern, the ape-man sought to elude
the infuriated charge which he well knew no living creature could
withstand. Neither did he dare risk the chance of experimenting upon
this strange GRYF with the tactics of the Tor-o-don that he had found
so efficacious upon that other occasion when his life and liberty had
been the stakes for which he cast. In many respects the conditions were
dissimilar. Before, in broad daylight, he had been able to approach the
GRYF under normal conditions in its natural state, and the GRYF itself
was one that he had seen subjected to the authority of man, or at least
of a manlike creature; but here he was confronted by an imprisoned
beast in the full swing of a furious charge and he had every reason to
suspect that this GRYF might never have felt the restraining influence
of authority, confined as it was in this gloomy pit to serve likely but
the single purpose that Tarzan had already seen so graphically
portrayed in his own experience of the past few moments.

To elude the creature, then, upon the possibility of discovering some
loophole of escape from his predicament seemed to the ape-man the
wisest course to pursue. Too much was at stake to risk an encounter
that might be avoided--an encounter the outcome of which there was
every reason to apprehend would seal the fate of the mate that he had
just found, only to lose again so harrowingly. Yet high as his
disappointment and chagrin ran, hopeless as his present estate now
appeared, there tingled in the veins of the savage lord a warm glow of
thanksgiving and elation.  She lived! After all these weary months of
hopelessness and fear he had found her. She lived!

To the opposite side of the chamber, silently as the wraith of a
disembodied soul, the swift jungle creature moved from the path of the
charging Titan that, guided solely in the semi-darkness by its keen
ears, bore down upon the spot toward which Tarzan's noisy entrance into
its lair had attracted it. Along the further wall the ape-man hurried.
Before him now appeared the black opening of the corridor from which
the beast had emerged into the larger chamber. Without hesitation
Tarzan plunged into it. Even here his eyes, long accustomed to darkness
that would have seemed total to you or to me, saw dimly the floor and
the walls within a radius of a few feet--enough at least to prevent him
plunging into any unguessed abyss, or dashing himself upon solid rock
at a sudden turning.

The corridor was both wide and lofty, which indeed it must be to
accommodate the colossal proportions of the creature whose habitat it
was, and so Tarzan encountered no difficulty in moving with reasonable
speed along its winding trail. He was aware as he proceeded that the
trend of the passage was downward, though not steeply, but it seemed
interminable and he wondered to what distant subterranean lair it might
lead. There was a feeling that perhaps after all he might better have
remained in the larger chamber and risked all on the chance of subduing
the GRYF where there was at least sufficient room and light to lend to
the experiment some slight chance of success. To be overtaken here in
the narrow confines of the black corridor where he was assured the GRYF
could not see him at all would spell almost certain death and now he
heard the thing approaching from behind. Its thunderous bellows fairly
shook the cliff from which the cavernous chambers were excavated. To
halt and meet this monstrous incarnation of fury with a futile whee-oo!
seemed to Tarzan the height of insanity and so he continued along the
corridor, increasing his pace as he realized that the GRYF was
overhauling him.

Presently the darkness lessened and at the final turning of the passage
he saw before him an area of moonlight. With renewed hope he sprang
rapidly forward and emerged from the mouth of the corridor to find
himself in a large circular enclosure the towering white walls of which
rose high upon every side--smooth perpendicular walls upon the sheer
face of which was no slightest foothold. To his left lay a pool of
water, one side of which lapped the foot of the wall at this point. It
was, doubtless, the wallow and the drinking pool of the GRYF.

And now the creature emerged from the corridor and Tarzan retreated to
the edge of the pool to make his last stand. There was no staff with
which to enforce the authority of his voice, but yet he made his stand
for there seemed naught else to do.  Just beyond the entrance to the
corridor the GRYF paused, turning its weak eyes in all directions as
though searching for its prey.  This then seemed the psychological
moment for his attempt and raising his voice in peremptory command the
ape-man voiced the weird whee-oo! of the Tor-o-don. Its effect upon the
GRYF was instantaneous and complete--with a terrific bellow it lowered
its three horns and dashed madly in the direction of the sound.

To right nor to left was any avenue of escape, for behind him lay the
placid waters of the pool, while down upon him from before thundered
annihilation. The mighty body seemed already to tower above him as the
ape-man turned and dove into the dark waters.

Dead in her breast lay hope. Battling for life during harrowing months
of imprisonment and danger and hardship it had fitfully flickered and
flamed only to sink after each renewal to smaller proportions than
before and now it had died out entirely leaving only cold, charred
embers that Jane Clayton knew would never again be rekindled. Hope was
dead as she faced Lu-don, the high priest, in her prison quarters in
the Temple of the Gryf at A-lur. Both time and hardship had failed to
leave their impress upon her physical beauty--the contours of her
perfect form, the glory of her radiant loveliness had defied them, yet
to these very attributes she owed the danger which now confronted her,
for Lu-don desired her. From the lesser priests she had been safe, but
from Lu-don, she was not safe, for Lu-don was not as they, since the
high priestship of Pal-ul-don may descend from father to son.

Ko-tan, the king, had wanted her and all that had so far saved her from
either was the fear of each for the other, but at last Lu-don had cast
aside discretion and had come in the silent watches of the night to
claim her. Haughtily had she repulsed him, seeking ever to gain time,
though what time might bring her of relief or renewed hope she could
not even remotely conjecture.  A leer of lust and greed shone hungrily
upon his cruel countenance as he advanced across the room to seize her.
She did not shrink nor cower, but stood there very erect, her chin up,
her level gaze freighted with the loathing and contempt she felt for
him. He read her expression and while it angered him, it but increased
his desire for possession. Here indeed was a queen, perhaps a goddess;
fit mate for the high priest.

"You shall not!" she said as he would have touched her. "One of us
shall die before ever your purpose is accomplished."

He was close beside her now. His laugh grated upon her ears.  "Love
does not kill," he replied mockingly.

He reached for her arm and at the same instant something clashed
against the bars of one of the windows, crashing them inward to the
floor, to be followed almost simultaneously by a human figure which
dove headforemost into the room, its head enveloped in the skin window
hangings which it carried with it in its impetuous entry.

Jane Clayton saw surprise and something of terror too leap to the
countenance of the high priest and then she saw him spring forward and
jerk upon a leather thong that depended from the ceiling of the
apartment. Instantly there dropped from above a cunningly contrived
partition that fell between them and the intruder, effectively barring
him from them and at the same time leaving him to grope upon its
opposite side in darkness, since the only cresset the room contained
was upon their side of the partition.

Faintly from beyond the wall Jane heard a voice calling, but whose it
was and what the words she could not distinguish. Then she saw Lu-don
jerk upon another thong and wait in evident expectancy of some
consequent happening. He did not have long to wait. She saw the thong
move suddenly as though jerked from above and then Lu-don smiled and
with another signal put in motion whatever machinery it was that raised
the partition again to its place in the ceiling.

Advancing into that portion of the room that the partition had shut off
from them, the high priest knelt upon the floor, and down tilting a
section of it, revealed the dark mouth of a shaft leading below.
Laughing loudly he shouted into the hole: "Return to thy father, O
Dor-ul-Otho!"

Making fast the catch that prevented the trapdoor from opening beneath
the feet of the unwary until such time as Lu-don chose the high priest
rose again to his feet.

"Now, Beautiful One!" he cried, and then, "Ja-don! what do you here?"

Jane Clayton turned to follow the direction of Lu-don's eyes and there
she saw framed in the entrance-way to the apartment the mighty figure
of a warrior, upon whose massive features sat an expression of stern
and uncompromising authority.

"I come from Ko-tan, the king," replied Ja-don, "to remove the
beautiful stranger to the Forbidden Garden."

"The king defies me, the high priest of Jad-ben-Otho?" cried Lu-don.

"It is the king's command--I have spoken," snapped Ja-don, in whose
manner was no sign of either fear or respect for the priest.

Lu-don well knew why the king had chosen this messenger whose heresy
was notorious, but whose power had as yet protected him from the
machinations of the priest. Lu-don cast a surreptitious glance at the
thongs hanging from the ceiling. Why not? If he could but maneuver to
entice Ja-don to the opposite side of the chamber!

"Come," he said in a conciliatory tone, "let us discuss the matter,"
and moved toward the spot where he would have Ja-don follow him.

"There is nothing to discuss," replied Ja-don, yet he followed the
priest, fearing treachery.

Jane watched them. In the face and figure of the warrior she found
reflected those admirable traits of courage and honor that the
profession of arms best develops. In the hypocritical priest there was
no redeeming quality. Of the two then she might best choose the
warrior. With him there was a chance--with Lu-don, none. Even the very
process of exchange from one prison to another might offer some
possibility of escape. She weighed all these things and decided, for
Lu-don's quick glance at the thongs had not gone unnoticed nor
uninterpreted by her.

"Warrior," she said, addressing Ja-don, "if you would live enter not
that portion of the room."

Lu-don cast an angry glance upon her. "Silence, slave!" he cried.

"And where lies the danger?" Ja-don asked of Jane, ignoring Lu-don.

The woman pointed to the thongs. "Look," she said, and before the high
priest could prevent she had seized that which controlled the partition
which shot downward separating Lu-don from the warrior and herself.

Ja-don looked inquiringly at her. "He would have tricked me neatly but
for you," he said; "kept me imprisoned there while he secreted you
elsewhere in the mazes of his temple."

"He would have done more than that," replied Jane, as she pulled upon
the other thong. "This releases the fastenings of a trapdoor in the
floor beyond the partition. When you stepped on that you would have
been precipitated into a pit beneath the temple.  Lu-don has threatened
me with this fate often. I do not know that he speaks the truth, but he
says that a demon of the temple is imprisoned there--a huge GRYF."

"There is a GRYF within the temple," said Ja-don. "What with it and the
sacrifices, the priests keep us busy supplying them with prisoners,
though the victims are sometimes those for whom Lu-don has conceived
hatred among our own people. He has had his eyes upon me for a long
time. This would have been his chance but for you. Tell me, woman, why
you warned me. Are we not all equally your jailers and your enemies?"

"None could be more horrible than Lu-don," she replied; "and you have
the appearance of a brave and honorable warrior. I could not hope, for
hope has died and yet there is the possibility that among so many
fighting men, even though they be of another race than mine, there is
one who would accord honorable treatment to a stranger within his
gates--even though she be a woman."

Ja-don looked at her for a long minute. "Ko-tan would make you his
queen," he said. "That he told me himself and surely that were
honorable treatment from one who might make you a slave."

"Why, then, would he make me queen?" she asked.

Ja-don came closer as though in fear his words might be overheard. "He
believes, although he did not tell me so in fact, that you are of the
race of gods. And why not? Jad-ben-Otho is tailless, therefore it is
not strange that Ko-tan should suspect that only the gods are thus. His
queen is dead leaving only a single daughter. He craves a son and what
more desirable than that he should found a line of rulers for
Pal-ul-don descended from the gods?"

"But I am already wed," cried Jane. "I cannot wed another. I do not
want him or his throne."

"Ko-tan is king," replied Ja-don simply as though that explained and
simplified everything.

"You will not save me then?" she asked.

"If you were in Ja-lur," he replied, "I might protect you, even against
the king."

"What and where is Ja-lur?" she asked, grasping at any straw.

"It is the city where I rule," he answered. "I am chief there and of
all the valley beyond."

"Where is it?" she insisted, and "is it far?"

"No," he replied, smiling, "it is not far, but do not think of
that--you could never reach it. There are too many to pursue and
capture you. If you wish to know, however, it lies up the river that
empties into Jad-ben-lul whose waters kiss the walls of A-lur--up the
western fork it lies with water upon three sides.  Impregnable city of
Pal-ul-don--alone of all the cities it has never been entered by a
foeman since it was built there while Jad-ben-Otho was a boy."

"And there I would be safe?" she asked.

"Perhaps," he replied.

Ah, dead Hope; upon what slender provocation would you seek to glow
again! She sighed and shook her head, realizing the inutility of
Hope--yet the tempting bait dangled before her mind's eye--Ja-lur!

"You are wise," commented Ja-don interpreting her sigh. "Come now, we
will go to the quarters of the princess beside the Forbidden Garden.
There you will remain with O-lo-a, the king's daughter. It will be
better than this prison you have occupied."

"And Ko-tan?" she asked, a shudder passing through her slender frame.

"There are ceremonies," explained Ja-don, "that may occupy several days
before you become queen, and one of them may be difficult of
arrangement." He laughed, then.

"What?" she asked.

"Only the high priest may perform the marriage ceremony for a king," he
explained.

"Delay!" she murmured; "blessed delay!" Tenacious indeed of life is
Hope even though it be reduced to cold and lifeless char--a veritable
phoenix.



15

"The King Is Dead!"

As they conversed Ja-don had led her down the stone stairway that leads
from the upper floors of the Temple of the Gryf to the chambers and the
corridors that honeycomb the rocky hills from which the temple and the
palace are hewn and now they passed from one to the other through a
doorway upon one side of which two priests stood guard and upon the
other two warriors. The former would have halted Ja-don when they saw
who it was that accompanied him for well known throughout the temple
was the quarrel between king and high priest for possession of this
beautiful stranger.

"Only by order of Lu-don may she pass," said one, placing himself
directly in front of Jane Clayton, barring her progress. Through the
hollow eyes of the hideous mask the woman could see those of the priest
beneath gleaming with the fires of fanaticism. Ja-don placed an arm
about her shoulders and laid his hand upon his knife.

"She passes by order of Ko-tan, the king," he said, "and by virtue of
the fact that Ja-don, the chief, is her guide. Stand aside!"

The two warriors upon the palace side pressed forward. "We are here,
gund of Ja-lur," said one, addressing Ja-don, "to receive and obey your
commands."

The second priest now interposed. "Let them pass," he admonished his
companion. "We have received no direct commands from Lu-don to the
contrary and it is a law of the temple and the palace that chiefs and
priests may come and go without interference."

"But I know Lu-don's wishes," insisted the other.

"He told you then that Ja-don must not pass with the stranger?"

"No--but--"

"Then let them pass, for they are three to two and will pass anyway--we
have done our best."

Grumbling, the priest stepped aside. "Lu-don will exact an accounting,"
he cried angrily.

Ja-don turned upon him. "And get it when and where he will," he snapped.

They came at last to the quarters of the Princess O-lo-a where, in the
main entrance-way, loitered a small guard of palace warriors and
several stalwart black eunuchs belonging to the princess, or her women.
To one of the latter Ja-don relinquished his charge.

"Take her to the princess," he commanded, "and see that she does not
escape."

Through a number of corridors and apartments lighted by stone cressets
the eunuch led Lady Greystoke halting at last before a doorway
concealed by hangings of JATO skin, where the guide beat with his staff
upon the wall beside the door.

"O-lo-a, Princess of Pal-ul-don," he called, "here is the stranger
woman, the prisoner from the temple."

"Bid her enter," Jane heard a sweet voice from within command.

The eunuch drew aside the hangings and Lady Greystoke stepped within.
Before her was a low-ceiled room of moderate size. In each of the four
corners a kneeling figure of stone seemed to be bearing its portion of
the weight of the ceiling upon its shoulders. These figures were
evidently intended to represent Waz-don slaves and were not without
bold artistic beauty. The ceiling itself was slightly arched to a
central dome which was pierced to admit light by day, and air. Upon one
side of the room were many windows, the other three walls being blank
except for a doorway in each. The princess lay upon a pile of furs
which were arranged over a low stone dais in one corner of the
apartment and was alone except for a single Waz-don slave girl who sat
upon the edge of the dais near her feet.

As Jane entered O-lo-a beckoned her to approach and when she stood
beside the couch the girl half rose upon an elbow and surveyed her
critically.

"How beautiful you are," she said simply.

Jane smiled, sadly; for she had found that beauty may be a curse.

"That is indeed a compliment," she replied quickly, "from one so
radiant as the Princess O-lo-a."

"Ah!" exclaimed the princess delightedly; "you speak my language! I was
told that you were of another race and from some far land of which we
of Pal-ul-don have never heard."

"Lu-don saw to it that the priests instructed me," explained Jane; "but
I am from a far country, Princess; one to which I long to return--and I
am very unhappy."

"But Ko-tan, my father, would make you his queen," cried the girl;
"that should make you very happy."

"But it does not," replied the prisoner; "I love another to whom I am
already wed. Ah, Princess, if you had known what it was to love and to
be forced into marriage with another you would sympathize with me."

The Princess O-lo-a was silent for a long moment. "I know," she said at
last, "and I am very sorry for you; but if the king's daughter cannot
save herself from such a fate who may save a slave woman? for such in
fact you are."

The drinking in the great banquet hall of the palace of Ko-tan, king of
Pal-ul-don had commenced earlier this night than was usual, for the
king was celebrating the morrow's betrothal of his only daughter to
Bu-lot, son of Mo-sar, the chief, whose great-grandfather had been king
of Pal-ul-don and who thought that he should be king, and Mo-sar was
drunk and so was Bu-lot, his son. For that matter nearly all of the
warriors, including the king himself, were drunk. In the heart of
Ko-tan was no love either for Mo-sar, or Bu-lot, nor did either of
these love the king. Ko-tan was giving his daughter to Bu-lot in the
hope that the alliance would prevent Mo-sar from insisting upon his
claims to the throne, for, next to Ja-don, Mo-sar was the most powerful
of the chiefs and while Ko-tan looked with fear upon Ja-don, too, he
had no fear that the old Lion-man would attempt to seize the throne,
though which way he would throw his influence and his warriors in the
event that Mo-sar declare war upon Ko-tan, the king could not guess.

Primitive people who are also warlike are seldom inclined toward either
tact or diplomacy even when sober; but drunk they know not the words,
if aroused. It was really Bu-lot who started it.

"This," he said, "I drink to O-lo-a," and he emptied his tankard at a
single gulp. "And this," seizing a full one from a neighbor, "to her
son and mine who will bring back the throne of Pal-ul-don to its
rightful owners!"

"The king is not yet dead!" cried Ko-tan, rising to his feet; "nor is
Bu-lot yet married to his daughter--and there is yet time to save
Pal-ul-don from the spawn of the rabbit breed."

The king's angry tone and his insulting reference to Bu-lot's
well-known cowardice brought a sudden, sobering silence upon the
roistering company. Every eye turned upon Bu-lot and Mo-sar, who sat
together directly opposite the king. The first was very drunk though
suddenly he seemed quite sober. He was so drunk that for an instant he
forgot to be a coward, since his reasoning powers were so effectually
paralyzed by the fumes of liquor that he could not intelligently weigh
the consequences of his acts. It is reasonably conceivable that a drunk
and angry rabbit might commit a rash deed. Upon no other hypothesis is
the thing that Bu-lot now did explicable. He rose suddenly from the
seat to which he had sunk after delivering his toast and seizing the
knife from the sheath of the warrior upon his right hurled it with
terrific force at Ko-tan. Skilled in the art of throwing both their
knives and their clubs are the warriors of Pal-ul-don and at this short
distance and coming as it did without warning there was no defense and
but one possible result--Ko-tan, the king, lunged forward across the
table, the blade buried in his heart.

A brief silence followed the assassin's cowardly act. White with
terror, now, Bu-lot fell slowly back toward the doorway at his rear,
when suddenly angry warriors leaped with drawn knives to prevent his
escape and to avenge their king. But Mo-sar now took his stand beside
his son.

"Ko-tan is dead!" he cried. "Mo-sar is king! Let the loyal warriors of
Pal-ul-don protect their ruler!"

Mo-sar commanded a goodly following and these quickly surrounded him
and Bu-lot, but there were many knives against them and now Ja-don
pressed forward through those who confronted the pretender.

"Take them both!" he shouted. "The warriors of Pal-ul-don will choose
their own king after the assassin of Ko-tan has paid the penalty of his
treachery."

Directed now by a leader whom they both respected and admired those who
had been loyal to Ko-tan rushed forward upon the faction that had
surrounded Mo-sar. Fierce and terrible was the fighting, devoid,
apparently, of all else than the ferocious lust to kill and while it
was at its height Mo-sar and Bu-lot slipped unnoticed from the banquet
hall.

To that part of the palace assigned to them during their visit to A-lur
they hastened. Here were their servants and the lesser warriors of
their party who had not been bidden to the feast of Ko-tan. These were
directed quickly to gather together their belongings for immediate
departure. When all was ready, and it did not take long, since the
warriors of Pal-ul-don require but little impedimenta on the march,
they moved toward the palace gate.

Suddenly Mo-sar approached his son. "The princess," he whispered. "We
must not leave the city without her--she is half the battle for the
throne."

Bu-lot, now entirely sober, demurred. He had had enough of fighting and
of risk. "Let us get out of A-lur quickly," he urged, "or we shall have
the whole city upon us. She would not come without a struggle and that
would delay us too long."

"There is plenty of time," insisted Mo-sar. "They are still fighting in
the pal-e-don-so. It will be long before they miss us and, with Ko-tan
dead, long before any will think to look to the safety of the princess.
Our time is now--it was made for us by Jad-ben-Otho. Come!"

Reluctantly Bu-lot followed his father, who first instructed the
warriors to await them just inside the gateway of the palace. Rapidly
the two approached the quarters of the princess. Within the
entrance-way only a handful of warriors were on guard. The eunuchs had
retired.

"There is fighting in the pal-e-don-so," Mo-sar announced in feigned
excitement as they entered the presence of the guards.  "The king
desires you to come at once and has sent us to guard the apartments of
the princess. Make haste!" he commanded as the men hesitated.

The warriors knew him and that on the morrow the princess was to be
betrothed to Bu-lot, his son. If there was trouble what more natural
than that Mo-sar and Bu-lot should be intrusted with the safety of the
princess. And then, too, was not Mo-sar a powerful chief to whose
orders disobedience might prove a dangerous thing? They were but common
fighting men disciplined in the rough school of tribal warfare, but
they had learned to obey a superior and so they departed for the
banquet hall--the place-where-men-eat.

Barely waiting until they had disappeared Mo-sar crossed to the
hangings at the opposite end of the entrance-hall and followed by
Bu-lot made his way toward the sleeping apartment of O-lo-a and a
moment later, without warning, the two men burst in upon the three
occupants of the room. At sight of them O-lo-a sprang to her feet.

"What is the meaning of this?" she demanded angrily.

Mo-sar advanced and halted before her. Into his cunning mind had
entered a plan to trick her. If it succeeded it would prove easier than
taking her by force, and then his eyes fell upon Jane Clayton and he
almost gasped in astonishment and admiration, but he caught himself and
returned to the business of the moment.

"O-lo-a," he cried, "when you know the urgency of our mission you will
forgive us. We have sad news for you. There has been an uprising in the
palace and Ko-tan, the king, has been slain. The rebels are drunk with
liquor and now on their way here. We must get you out of A-lur at
once--there is not a moment to lose.  Come, and quickly!"

"My father dead?" cried O-lo-a, and suddenly her eyes went wide. "Then
my place is here with my people," she cried. "If Ko-tan is dead I am
queen until the warriors choose a new ruler--that is the law of
Pal-ul-don. And if I am queen none can make me wed whom I do not wish
to wed--and Jad-ben-Otho knows I never wished to wed thy cowardly son.
Go!" She pointed a slim forefinger imperiously toward the doorway.

Mo-sar saw that neither trickery nor persuasion would avail now and
every precious minute counted. He looked again at the beautiful woman
who stood beside O-lo-a. He had never before seen her but he well knew
from palace gossip that she could be no other than the godlike stranger
whom Ko-tan had planned to make his queen.

"Bu-lot," he cried to his son, "take you your own woman and I will
take--mine!" and with that he sprang suddenly forward and seizing Jane
about the waist lifted her in his arms, so that before O-lo-a or
Pan-at-lee might even guess his purpose he had disappeared through the
hangings near the foot of the dais and was gone with the stranger woman
struggling and fighting in his grasp.

And then Bu-lot sought to seize O-lo-a, but O-lo-a had her
Pan-at-lee--fierce little tiger-girl of the savage
Kor-ul-JA--Pan-at-lee whose name belied her--and Bu-lot found that with
the two of them his hands were full. When he would have lifted O-lo-a
and borne her away Pan-at-lee seized him around the legs and strove to
drag him down. Viciously he kicked her, but she would not desist, and
finally, realizing that he might not only lose his princess but be so
delayed as to invite capture if he did not rid himself of this clawing,
scratching she-JATO, he hurled O-lo-a to the floor and seizing
Pan-at-lee by the hair drew his knife and--

The curtains behind him suddenly parted. In two swift bounds a lithe
figure crossed the room and before ever the knife of Bu-lot reached its
goal his wrist was seized from behind and a terrific blow crashing to
the base of his brain dropped him, lifeless, to the floor. Bu-lot,
coward, traitor, and assassin, died without knowing who struck him down.

As Tarzan of the Apes leaped into the pool in the GRYF pit of the
temple at A-lur one might have accounted for his act on the hypothesis
that it was the last blind urge of self-preservation to delay, even for
a moment, the inevitable tragedy in which each some day must play the
leading role upon his little stage; but no--those cool, gray eyes had
caught the sole possibility for escape that the surroundings and the
circumstances offered--a tiny, moonlit patch of water glimmering
through a small aperture in the cliff at the surface of the pool upon
its farther side.  With swift, bold strokes he swam for speed alone
knowing that the water would in no way deter his pursuer. Nor did it.
Tarzan heard the great splash as the huge creature plunged into the
pool behind him; he heard the churning waters as it forged rapidly
onward in his wake. He was nearing the opening--would it be large
enough to permit the passage of his body? That portion of it which
showed above the surface of the water most certainly would not. His
life, then, depended upon how much of the aperture was submerged. And
now it was directly before him and the GRYF directly behind. There was
no alternative--there was no other hope. The ape-man threw all the
resources of his great strength into the last few strokes, extended his
hands before him as a cutwater, submerged to the water's level and shot
forward toward the hole.

Frothing with rage was the baffled Lu-don as he realized how neatly the
stranger she had turned his own tables upon him. He could of course
escape the Temple of the Gryf in which her quick wit had temporarily
imprisoned him; but during the delay, however brief, Ja-don would find
time to steal her from the temple and deliver her to Ko-tan. But he
would have her yet--that the high priest swore in the names of
Jad-ben-Otho and all the demons of his faith. He hated Ko-tan. Secretly
he had espoused the cause of Mo-sar, in whom he would have a willing
tool. Perhaps, then, this would give him the opportunity he had long
awaited--a pretext for inciting the revolt that would dethrone Ko-tan
and place Mo-sar in power--with Lu-don the real ruler of Pal-ul-don. He
licked his thin lips as he sought the window through which Tarzan had
entered and now Lu-don's only avenue of escape. Cautiously he made his
way across the floor, feeling before him with his hands, and when they
discovered that the trap was set for him an ugly snarl broke from the
priest's lips. "The she-devil!" he muttered; "but she shall pay, she
shall pay--ah, Jad-ben-Otho; how she shall pay for the trick she has
played upon Lu-don!"

He crawled through the window and climbed easily downward to the
ground. Should he pursue Ja-don and the woman, chancing an encounter
with the fierce chief, or bide his time until treachery and intrigue
should accomplish his design? He chose the latter solution, as might
have been expected of such as he.

Going to his quarters he summoned several of his priests--those who
were most in his confidence and who shared his ambitions for absolute
power of the temple over the palace--all men who hated Ko-tan.

"The time has come," he told them, "when the authority of the temple
must be placed definitely above that of the palace.  Ko-tan must make
way for Mo-sar, for Ko-tan has defied your high priest. Go then,
Pan-sat, and summon Mo-sar secretly to the temple, and you others go to
the city and prepare the faithful warriors that they may be in
readiness when the time comes."

For another hour they discussed the details of the coup d'etat that was
to overthrow the government of Pal-ul-don.  One knew a slave who, as
the signal sounded from the temple gong, would thrust a knife into the
heart of Ko-tan, for the price of liberty. Another held personal
knowledge of an officer of the palace that he could use to compel the
latter to admit a number of Lu-don's warriors to various parts of the
palace. With Mo-sar as the cat's paw, the plan seemed scarce possible
of failure and so they separated, going upon their immediate errands to
palace and to city.

As Pan-sat entered the palace grounds he was aware of a sudden
commotion in the direction of the pal-e-don-so and a few minutes later
Lu-don was surprised to see him return to the apartments of the high
priest, breathless and excited.

"What now, Pan-sat?" cried Lu-don. "Are you pursued by demons?"

"O master, our time has come and gone while we sat here planning.
Ko-tan is already dead and Mo-sar fled. His friends are fighting with
the warriors of the palace but they have no head, while Ja-don leads
the others. I could learn but little from frightened slaves who had
fled at the outburst of the quarrel. One told me that Bu-lot had slain
the king and that he had seen Mo-sar and the assassin hurrying from the
palace."

"Ja-don," muttered the high priest. "The fools will make him king if we
do not act and act quickly. Get into the city, Pan-sat--let your feet
fly and raise the cry that Ja-don has killed the king and is seeking to
wrest the throne from O-lo-a. Spread the word as you know best how to
spread it that Ja-don has threatened to destroy the priests and hurl
the altars of the temple into Jad-ben-lul. Rouse the warriors of the
city and urge them to attack at once. Lead them into the temple by the
secret way that only the priests know and from here we may spew them
out upon the palace before they learn the truth. Go, Pan-sat,
immediately--delay not an instant."

"But stay," he called as the under priest turned to leave the
apartment; "saw or heard you anything of the strange white woman that
Ja-don stole from the Temple of the Gryf where we have had her
imprisoned?"

"Only that Ja-don took her into the palace where he threatened the
priests with violence if they did not permit him to pass," replied
Pan-sat. "This they told me, but where within the palace she is hidden
I know not."

"Ko-tan ordered her to the Forbidden Garden," said Lu-don, "doubtless
we shall find her there. And now, Pan-sat, be upon your errand."

In a corridor by Lu-don's chamber a hideously masked priest leaned
close to the curtained aperture that led within. Were he listening he
must have heard all that passed between Pan-sat and the high priest,
and that he had listened was evidenced by his hasty withdrawal to the
shadows of a nearby passage as the lesser priest moved across the
chamber toward the doorway. Pan-sat went his way in ignorance of the
near presence that he almost brushed against as he hurried toward the
secret passage that leads from the temple of Jad-ben-Otho, far beneath
the palace, to the city beyond, nor did he sense the silent creature
following in his footsteps.



16

The Secret Way

It was a baffled GRYF that bellowed in angry rage as Tarzan's sleek
brown body cutting the moonlit waters shot through the aperture in the
wall of the GRYF pool and out into the lake beyond. The ape-man smiled
as he thought of the comparative ease with which he had defeated the
purpose of the high priest but his face clouded again at the ensuing
remembrance of the grave danger that threatened his mate. His sole
object now must be to return as quickly as he might to the chamber
where he had last seen her on the third floor of the Temple of the
Gryf, but how he was to find his way again into the temple grounds was
a question not easy of solution.

In the moonlight he could see the sheer cliff rising from the water for
a great distance along the shore--far beyond the precincts of the
temple and the palace--towering high above him, a seemingly impregnable
barrier against his return. Swimming close in, he skirted the wall
searching diligently for some foothold, however slight, upon its
smooth, forbidding surface.  Above him and quite out of reach were
numerous apertures, but there were no means at hand by which he could
reach them.  Presently, however, his hopes were raised by the sight of
an opening level with the surface of the water. It lay just ahead and a
few strokes brought him to it--cautious strokes that brought forth no
sound from the yielding waters. At the nearer side of the opening he
stopped and reconnoitered. There was no one in sight. Carefully he
raised his body to the threshold of the entrance-way, his smooth brown
hide glistening in the moonlight as it shed the water in tiny sparkling
rivulets.

Before him stretched a gloomy corridor, unlighted save for the faint
illumination of the diffused moonlight that penetrated it for but a
short distance from the opening. Moving as rapidly as reasonable
caution warranted, Tarzan followed the corridor into the bowels of the
cave. There was an abrupt turn and then a flight of steps at the top of
which lay another corridor running parallel with the face of the cliff.
This passage was dimly lighted by flickering cressets set in niches in
the walls at considerable distances apart. A quick survey showed the
ape-man numerous openings upon each side of the corridor and his quick
ears caught sounds that indicated that there were other beings not far
distant--priests, he concluded, in some of the apartments letting upon
the passageway.

To pass undetected through this hive of enemies appeared quite beyond
the range of possibility. He must again seek disguise and knowing from
experience how best to secure such he crept stealthily along the
corridor toward the nearest doorway. Like Numa, the lion, stalking a
wary prey he crept with quivering nostrils to the hangings that shut
off his view from the interior of the apartment beyond. A moment later
his head disappeared within; then his shoulders, and his lithe body,
and the hangings dropped quietly into place again. A moment later there
filtered to the vacant corridor without a brief, gasping gurgle and
again silence. A minute passed; a second, and a third, and then the
hangings were thrust aside and a grimly masked priest of the temple of
Jad-ben-Otho strode into the passageway.

With bold steps he moved along and was about to turn into a diverging
gallery when his attention was aroused by voices coming from a room
upon his left. Instantly the figure halted and crossing the corridor
stood with an ear close to the skins that concealed the occupants of
the room from him, and him from them.  Presently he leaped back into
the concealing shadows of the diverging gallery and immediately
thereafter the hangings by which he had been listening parted and a
priest emerged to turn quickly down the main corridor. The eavesdropper
waited until the other had gained a little distance and then stepping
from his place of concealment followed silently behind.

The way led along the corridor which ran parallel with the face of the
cliff for some little distance and then Pan-sat, taking a cresset from
one of the wall niches, turned abruptly into a small apartment at his
left. The tracker followed cautiously in time to see the rays of the
flickering light dimly visible from an aperture in the floor before
him. Here he found a series of steps, similar to those used by the
Waz-don in scaling the cliff to their caves, leading to a lower level.

First satisfying himself that his guide was continuing upon his way
unsuspecting, the other descended after him and continued his stealthy
stalking. The passageway was now both narrow and low, giving but bare
headroom to a tall man, and it was broken often by flights of steps
leading always downward. The steps in each unit seldom numbered more
than six and sometimes there was only one or two but in the aggregate
the tracker imagined that they had descended between fifty and
seventy-five feet from the level of the upper corridor when the
passageway terminated in a small apartment at one side of which was a
little pile of rubble.

Setting his cresset upon the ground, Pan-sat commenced hurriedly to
toss the bits of broken stone aside, presently revealing a small
aperture at the base of the wall upon the opposite side of which there
appeared to be a further accumulation of rubble. This he also removed
until he had a hole of sufficient size to permit the passage of his
body, and leaving the cresset still burning upon the floor the priest
crawled through the opening he had made and disappeared from the sight
of the watcher hiding in the shadows of the narrow passageway behind
him.

No sooner, however, was he safely gone than the other followed, finding
himself, after passing through the hole, on a little ledge about
halfway between the surface of the lake and the top of the cliff above.
The ledge inclined steeply upward, ending at the rear of a building
which stood upon the edge of the cliff and which the second priest
entered just in time to see Pan-sat pass out into the city beyond.

As the latter turned a nearby corner the other emerged from the doorway
and quickly surveyed his surroundings. He was satisfied the priest who
had led him hither had served his purpose in so far as the tracker was
concerned. Above him, and perhaps a hundred yards away, the white walls
of the palace gleamed against the northern sky. The time that it had
taken him to acquire definite knowledge concerning the secret
passageway between the temple and the city he did not count as lost,
though he begrudged every instant that kept him from the prosecution of
his main objective. It had seemed to him, however, necessary to the
success of a bold plan that he had formulated upon overhearing the
conversation between Lu-don and Pan-sat as he stood without the
hangings of the apartment of the high priest.

Alone against a nation of suspicious and half-savage enemies he could
scarce hope for a successful outcome to the one great issue upon which
hung the life and happiness of the creature he loved best. For her sake
he must win allies and it was for this purpose that he had sacrificed
these precious moments, but now he lost no further time in seeking to
regain entrance to the palace grounds that he might search out whatever
new prison they had found in which to incarcerate his lost love.

He found no difficulty in passing the guards at the entrance to the
palace for, as he had guessed, his priestly disguise disarmed all
suspicion. As he approached the warriors he kept his hands behind him
and trusted to fate that the sickly light of the single torch which
stood beside the doorway would not reveal his un-Pal-ul-donian feet. As
a matter of fact so accustomed were they to the comings and goings of
the priesthood that they paid scant attention to him and he passed on
into the palace grounds without even a moment's delay.

His goal now was the Forbidden Garden and this he had little difficulty
in reaching though he elected to enter it over the wall rather than to
chance arousing any suspicion on the part of the guards at the inner
entrance, since he could imagine no reason why a priest should seek
entrance there thus late at night.

He found the garden deserted, nor any sign of her he sought.  That she
had been brought hither he had learned from the conversation he had
overheard between Lu-don and Pan-sat, and he was sure that there had
been no time or opportunity for the high priest to remove her from the
palace grounds. The garden he knew to be devoted exclusively to the
uses of the princess and her women and it was only reasonable to assume
therefore that if Jane had been brought to the garden it could only
have been upon an order from Ko-tan. This being the case the natural
assumption would follow that he would find her in some other portion of
O-lo-a's quarters.

Just where these lay he could only conjecture, but it seemed reasonable
to believe that they must be adjacent to the garden, so once more he
scaled the wall and passing around its end directed his steps toward an
entrance-way which he judged must lead to that portion of the palace
nearest the Forbidden Garden.

To his surprise he found the place unguarded and then there fell upon
his ear from an interior apartment the sound of voices raised in anger
and excitement. Guided by the sound he quickly traversed several
corridors and chambers until he stood before the hangings which
separated him from the chamber from which issued the sounds of
altercation. Raising the skins slightly he looked within. There were
two women battling with a Ho-don warrior. One was the daughter of
Ko-tan and the other Pan-at-lee, the Kor-ul-JA.

At the moment that Tarzan lifted the hangings, the warrior threw O-lo-a
viciously to the ground and seizing Pan-at-lee by the hair drew his
knife and raised it above her head. Casting the encumbering headdress
of the dead priest from his shoulders the ape-man leaped across the
intervening space and seizing the brute from behind struck him a single
terrible blow.

As the man fell forward dead, the two women recognized Tarzan
simultaneously. Pan-at-lee fell upon her knees and would have bowed her
head upon his feet had he not, with an impatient gesture, commanded her
to rise. He had no time to listen to their protestations of gratitude
or answer the numerous questions which he knew would soon be flowing
from those two feminine tongues.

"Tell me," he cried, "where is the woman of my own race whom Ja-don
brought here from the temple?"

"She is but this moment gone," cried O-lo-a. "Mo-sar, the father of
this thing here," and she indicated the body of Bu-lot with a scornful
finger, "seized her and carried her away."

"Which way?" he cried. "Tell me quickly, in what direction he took her."

"That way," cried Pan-at-lee, pointing to the doorway through which
Mo-sar had passed. "They would have taken the princess and the stranger
woman to Tu-lur, Mo-sar's city by the Dark Lake."

"I go to find her," he said to Pan-at-lee, "she is my mate. And if I
survive I shall find means to liberate you too and return you to Om-at."

Before the girl could reply he had disappeared behind the hangings of
the door near the foot of the dais. The corridor through which he ran
was illy lighted and like nearly all its kind in the Ho-don city wound
in and out and up and down, but at last it terminated at a sudden turn
which brought him into a courtyard filled with warriors, a portion of
the palace guard that had just been summoned by one of the lesser
palace chiefs to join the warriors of Ko-tan in the battle that was
raging in the banquet hall.

At sight of Tarzan, who in his haste had forgotten to recover his
disguising headdress, a great shout arose. "Blasphemer!" "Defiler of
the temple!" burst hoarsely from savage throats, and mingling with
these were a few who cried, "Dor-ul-Otho!" evidencing the fact that
there were among them still some who clung to their belief in his
divinity.

To cross the courtyard armed only with a knife, in the face of this
great throng of savage fighting men seemed even to the giant ape-man a
thing impossible of achievement. He must use his wits now and quickly
too, for they were closing upon him. He might have turned and fled back
through the corridor but flight now even in the face of dire necessity
would but delay him in his pursuit of Mo-sar and his mate.

"Stop!" he cried, raising his palm against them. "I am the Dor-ul-Otho
and I come to you with a word from Ja-don, who it is my father's will
shall be your king now that Ko-tan is slain.  Lu-don, the high priest,
has planned to seize the palace and destroy the loyal warriors that
Mo-sar may be made king--Mo-sar who will be the tool and creature of
Lu-don. Follow me. There is no time to lose if you would prevent the
traitors whom Lu-don has organized in the city from entering the palace
by a secret way and overpowering Ja-don and the faithful band within."

For a moment they hesitated. At last one spoke. "What guarantee have
we," he demanded, "that it is not you who would betray us and by
leading us now away from the fighting in the banquet hall cause those
who fight at Ja-don's side to be defeated?"

"My life will be your guarantee," replied Tarzan. "If you find that I
have not spoken the truth you are sufficient in numbers to execute
whatever penalty you choose. But come, there is not time to lose.
Already are the lesser priests gathering their warriors in the city
below," and without waiting for any further parley he strode directly
toward them in the direction of the gate upon the opposite side of the
courtyard which led toward the principal entrance to the palace ground.

Slower in wit than he, they were swept away by his greater initiative
and that compelling power which is inherent to all natural leaders. And
so they followed him, the giant ape-man with a dead tail dragging the
ground behind him--a demi-god where another would have been ridiculous.
Out into the city he led them and down toward the unpretentious
building that hid Lu-don's secret passageway from the city to the
temple, and as they rounded the last turn they saw before them a
gathering of warriors which was being rapidly augmented from all
directions as the traitors of A-lur mobilized at the call of the
priesthood.

"You spoke the truth, stranger," said the chief who marched at Tarzan's
side, "for there are the warriors with the priests among them, even as
you told us."

"And now," replied the ape-man, "that I have fulfilled my promise I
will go my way after Mo-sar, who has done me a great wrong.  Tell
Ja-don that Jad-ben-Otho is upon his side, nor do you forget to tell
him also that it was the Dor-ul-Otho who thwarted Lu-don's plan to
seize the palace."

"I will not forget," replied the chief. "Go your way. We are enough to
overpower the traitors."

"Tell me," asked Tarzan, "how I may know this city of Tu-lur?"

"It lies upon the south shore of the second lake below A-lur," replied
the chief, "the lake that is called Jad-in-lul."

They were now approaching the band of traitors, who evidently thought
that this was another contingent of their own party since they made no
effort either toward defense or retreat. Suddenly the chief raised his
voice in a savage war cry that was immediately taken up by his
followers, and simultaneously, as though the cry were a command, the
entire party broke into a mad charge upon the surprised rebels.

Satisfied with the outcome of his suddenly conceived plan and sure that
it would work to the disadvantage of Lu-don, Tarzan turned into a side
street and pointed his steps toward the outskirts of the city in search
of the trail that led southward toward Tu-lur.



17

By Jad-bal-lul

As Mo-sar carried Jane Clayton from the palace of Ko-tan, the king, the
woman struggled incessantly to regain her freedom. He tried to compel
her to walk, but despite his threats and his abuse she would not
voluntarily take a single step in the direction in which he wished her
to go. Instead she threw herself to the ground each time he sought to
place her upon her feet, and so of necessity he was compelled to carry
her though at last he tied her hands and gagged her to save himself
from further lacerations, for the beauty and slenderness of the woman
belied her strength and courage. When he came at last to where his men
had gathered he was glad indeed to turn her over to a couple of
stalwart warriors, but these too were forced to carry her since
Mo-sar's fear of the vengeance of Ko-tan's retainers would brook no
delays.

And thus they came down out of the hills from which A-lur is carved, to
the meadows that skirt the lower end of Jad-ben-lul, with Jane Clayton
carried between two of Mo-sar's men. At the edge of the lake lay a
fleet of strong canoes, hollowed from the trunks of trees, their bows
and sterns carved in the semblance of grotesque beasts or birds and
vividly colored by some master in that primitive school of art, which
fortunately is not without its devotees today.

Into the stern of one of these canoes the warriors tossed their captive
at a sign from Mo-sar, who came and stood beside her as the warriors
were finding their places in the canoes and selecting their paddles.

"Come, Beautiful One," he said, "let us be friends and you shall not be
harmed. You will find Mo-sar a kind master if you do his bidding," and
thinking to make a good impression on her he removed the gag from her
mouth and the thongs from her wrists, knowing well that she could not
escape surrounded as she was by his warriors, and presently, when they
were out on the lake, she would be as safely imprisoned as though he
held her behind bars.

And so the fleet moved off to the accompaniment of the gentle splashing
of a hundred paddles, to follow the windings of the rivers and lakes
through which the waters of the Valley of Jad-ben-Otho empty into the
great morass to the south. The warriors, resting upon one knee, faced
the bow and in the last canoe Mo-sar tiring of his fruitless attempts
to win responses from his sullen captive, squatted in the bottom of the
canoe with his back toward her and resting his head upon the gunwale
sought sleep.

Thus they moved in silence between the verdure-clad banks of the little
river through which the waters of Jad-ben-lul emptied--now in the
moonlight, now in dense shadow where great trees overhung the stream,
and at last out upon the waters of another lake, the black shores of
which seemed far away under the weird influence of a moonlight night.

Jane Clayton sat alert in the stern of the last canoe. For months she
had been under constant surveillance, the prisoner first of one
ruthless race and now the prisoner of another. Since the long-gone day
that Hauptmann Fritz Schneider and his band of native German troops had
treacherously wrought the Kaiser's work of rapine and destruction on
the Greystoke bungalow and carried her away to captivity she had not
drawn a free breath. That she had survived unharmed the countless
dangers through which she had passed she attributed solely to the
beneficence of a kind and watchful Providence.

At first she had been held on the orders of the German High Command
with a view of her ultimate value as a hostage and during these months
she had been subjected to neither hardship nor oppression, but when the
Germans had become hard pressed toward the close of their unsuccessful
campaign in East Africa it had been determined to take her further into
the interior and now there was an element of revenge in their motives,
since it must have been apparent that she could no longer be of any
possible military value.

Bitter indeed were the Germans against that half-savage mate of hers
who had cunningly annoyed and harassed them with a fiendishness of
persistence and ingenuity that had resulted in a noticeable loss in
morale in the sector he had chosen for his operations. They had to
charge against him the lives of certain officers that he had
deliberately taken with his own hands, and one entire section of trench
that had made possible a disastrous turning movement by the British.
Tarzan had out-generaled them at every point. He had met cunning with
cunning and cruelty with cruelties until they feared and loathed his
very name. The cunning trick that they had played upon him in
destroying his home, murdering his retainers, and covering the
abduction of his wife in such a way as to lead him to believe that she
had been killed, they had regretted a thousand times, for a
thousandfold had they paid the price for their senseless ruthlessness,
and now, unable to wreak their vengeance directly upon him, they had
conceived the idea of inflicting further suffering upon his mate.

In sending her into the interior to avoid the path of the victorious
British, they had chosen as her escort Lieutenant Erich Obergatz who
had been second in command of Schneider's company, and who alone of its
officers had escaped the consuming vengeance of the ape-man. For a long
time Obergatz had held her in a native village, the chief of which was
still under the domination of his fear of the ruthless German
oppressors. While here only hardships and discomforts assailed her,
Obergatz himself being held in leash by the orders of his distant
superior but as time went on the life in the village grew to be a
veritable hell of cruelties and oppressions practiced by the arrogant
Prussian upon the villagers and the members of his native command--for
time hung heavily upon the hands of the lieutenant and with idleness
combining with the personal discomforts he was compelled to endure, his
none too agreeable temper found an outlet first in petty interference
with the chiefs and later in the practice of absolute cruelties upon
them.

What the self-sufficient German could not see was plain to Jane
Clayton--that the sympathies of Obergatz' native soldiers lay with the
villagers and that all were so heartily sickened by his abuse that it
needed now but the slightest spark to detonate the mine of revenge and
hatred that the pig-headed Hun had been assiduously fabricating beneath
his own person.

And at last it came, but from an unexpected source in the form of a
German native deserter from the theater of war. Footsore, weary, and
spent, he dragged himself into the village late one afternoon, and
before Obergatz was even aware of his presence the whole village knew
that the power of Germany in Africa was at an end. It did not take long
for the lieutenant's native soldiers to realize that the authority that
held them in service no longer existed and that with it had gone the
power to pay them their miserable wage. Or at least, so they reasoned.
To them Obergatz no longer represented aught else than a powerless and
hated foreigner, and short indeed would have been his shrift had not a
native woman who had conceived a doglike affection for Jane Clayton
hurried to her with word of the murderous plan, for the fate of the
innocent white woman lay in the balance beside that of the guilty
Teuton.

"Already they are quarreling as to which one shall possess you," she
told Jane.

"When will they come for us?" asked Jane. "Did you hear them say?"

"Tonight," replied the woman, "for even now that he has none to fight
for him they still fear the white man. And so they will come at night
and kill him while he sleeps."

Jane thanked the woman and sent her away lest the suspicion of her
fellows be aroused against her when they discovered that the two whites
had learned of their intentions. The woman went at once to the hut
occupied by Obergatz. She had never gone there before and the German
looked up in surprise as he saw who his visitor was.

Briefly she told him what she had heard. At first he was inclined to
bluster arrogantly, with a great display of bravado but she silenced
him peremptorily.

"Such talk is useless," she said shortly. "You have brought upon
yourself the just hatred of these people. Regardless of the truth or
falsity of the report which has been brought to them, they believe in
it and there is nothing now between you and your Maker other than
flight. We shall both be dead before morning if we are unable to escape
from the village unseen. If you go to them now with your silly
protestations of authority you will be dead a little sooner, that is
all."

"You think it is as bad as that?" he said, a noticeable alteration in
his tone and manner.

"It is precisely as I have told you," she replied. "They will come
tonight and kill you while you sleep. Find me pistols and a rifle and
ammunition and we will pretend that we go into the jungle to hunt. That
you have done often. Perhaps it will arouse suspicion that I accompany
you but that we must chance. And be sure my dear Herr Lieutenant to
bluster and curse and abuse your servants unless they note a change in
your manner and realizing your fear know that you suspect their
intention. If all goes well then we can go out into the jungle to hunt
and we need not return.

"But first and now you must swear never to harm me, or otherwise it
would be better that I called the chief and turned you over to him and
then put a bullet into my own head, for unless you swear as I have
asked I were no better alone in the jungle with you than here at the
mercies of these degraded blacks."

"I swear," he replied solemnly, "in the names of my God and my Kaiser
that no harm shall befall you at my hands, Lady Greystoke."

"Very well," she said, "we will make this pact to assist each other to
return to civilization, but let it be understood that there is and
never can be any semblance even of respect for you upon my part. I am
drowning and you are the straw. Carry that always in your mind, German."

If Obergatz had held any doubt as to the sincerity of her word it would
have been wholly dissipated by the scathing contempt of her tone. And
so Obergatz, without further parley, got pistols and an extra rifle for
Jane, as well as bandoleers of cartridges. In his usual arrogant and
disagreeable manner he called his servants, telling them that he and
the white kali were going out into the brush to hunt. The beaters would
go north as far as the little hill and then circle back to the east and
in toward the village.  The gun carriers he directed to take the extra
pieces and precede himself and Jane slowly toward the east, waiting for
them at the ford about half a mile distant. The blacks responded with
greater alacrity than usual and it was noticeable to both Jane and
Obergatz that they left the village whispering and laughing.

"The swine think it is a great joke," growled Obergatz, "that the
afternoon before I die I go out and hunt meat for them."

As soon as the gun bearers disappeared in the jungle beyond the village
the two Europeans followed along the same trail, nor was there any
attempt upon the part of Obergatz' native soldiers, or the warriors of
the chief to detain them, for they too doubtless were more than willing
that the whites should bring them in one more mess of meat before they
killed them.

A quarter of a mile from the village, Obergatz turned toward the south
from the trail that led to the ford and hurrying onward the two put as
great a distance as possible between them and the village before night
fell. They knew from the habits of their erstwhile hosts that there was
little danger of pursuit by night since the villagers held Numa, the
lion, in too great respect to venture needlessly beyond their stockade
during the hours that the king of beasts was prone to choose for
hunting.

And thus began a seemingly endless sequence of frightful days and
horror-laden nights as the two fought their way toward the south in the
face of almost inconceivable hardships, privations, and dangers. The
east coast was nearer but Obergatz positively refused to chance
throwing himself into the hands of the British by returning to the
territory which they now controlled, insisting instead upon attempting
to make his way through an unknown wilderness to South Africa where,
among the Boers, he was convinced he would find willing sympathizers
who would find some way to return him in safety to Germany, and the
woman was perforce compelled to accompany him.

And so they had crossed the great thorny, waterless steppe and come at
last to the edge of the morass before Pal-ul-don. They had reached this
point just before the rainy season when the waters of the morass were
at their lowest ebb. At this time a hard crust is baked upon the dried
surface of the marsh and there is only the open water at the center to
materially impede progress. It is a condition that exists perhaps not
more than a few weeks, or even days at the termination of long periods
of drought, and so the two crossed the otherwise almost impassable
barrier without realizing its latent terrors. Even the open water in
the center chanced to be deserted at the time by its frightful denizens
which the drought and the receding waters had driven southward toward
the mouth of Pal-ul-don's largest river which carries the waters out of
the Valley of Jad-ben-Otho.

Their wanderings carried them across the mountains and into the Valley
of Jad-ben-Otho at the source of one of the larger streams which bears
the mountain waters down into the valley to empty them into the main
river just below The Great Lake on whose northern shore lies A-lur. As
they had come down out of the mountains they had been surprised by a
party of Ho-don hunters.  Obergatz had escaped while Jane had been
taken prisoner and brought to A-lur. She had neither seen nor heard
aught of the German since that time and she did not know whether he had
perished in this strange land, or succeeded in successfully eluding its
savage denizens and making his way at last into South Africa.

For her part, she had been incarcerated alternately in the palace and
the temple as either Ko-tan or Lu-don succeeded in wresting her
temporarily from the other by various strokes of cunning and intrigue.
And now at last she was in the power of a new captor, one whom she knew
from the gossip of the temple and the palace to be cruel and degraded.
And she was in the stern of the last canoe, and every enemy back was
toward her, while almost at her feet Mo-sar's loud snores gave ample
evidence of his unconsciousness to his immediate surroundings.

The dark shore loomed closer to the south as Jane Clayton, Lady
Greystoke, slid quietly over the stern of the canoe into the chill
waters of the lake. She scarcely moved other than to keep her nostrils
above the surface while the canoe was yet discernible in the last rays
of the declining moon. Then she struck out toward the southern shore.

Alone, unarmed, all but naked, in a country overrun by savage beasts
and hostile men, she yet felt for the first time in many months a
sensation of elation and relief. She was free! What if the next moment
brought death, she knew again, at least a brief instant of absolute
freedom. Her blood tingled to the almost forgotten sensation and it was
with difficulty that she restrained a glad triumphant cry as she
clambered from the quiet waters and stood upon the silent beach.

Before her loomed a forest, darkly, and from its depths came those
nameless sounds that are a part of the night life of the jungle--the
rustling of leaves in the wind, the rubbing together of contiguous
branches, the scurrying of a rodent, all magnified by the darkness to
sinister and awe-inspiring proportions; the hoot of an owl, the distant
scream of a great cat, the barking of wild dogs, attested the presence
of the myriad life she could not see--the savage life, the free life of
which she was now a part.  And then there came to her, possibly for the
first time since the giant ape-man had come into her life, a fuller
realization of what the jungle meant to him, for though alone and
unprotected from its hideous dangers she yet felt its lure upon her and
an exaltation that she had not dared hope to feel again.

Ah, if that mighty mate of hers were but by her side! What utter joy
and bliss would be hers! She longed for no more than this.  The parade
of cities, the comforts and luxuries of civilization held forth no
allure half as insistent as the glorious freedom of the jungle.

A lion moaned in the blackness to her right, eliciting delicious
thrills that crept along her spine. The hair at the back of her head
seemed to stand erect--yet she was unafraid. The muscles bequeathed her
by some primordial ancestor reacted instinctively to the presence of an
ancient enemy--that was all. The woman moved slowly and deliberately
toward the wood. Again the lion moaned; this time nearer. She sought a
low-hanging branch and finding it swung easily into the friendly
shelter of the tree.  The long and perilous journey with Obergatz had
trained her muscles and her nerves to such unaccustomed habits. She
found a safe resting place such as Tarzan had taught her was best and
there she curled herself, thirty feet above the ground, for a night's
rest. She was cold and uncomfortable and yet she slept, for her heart
was warm with renewed hope and her tired brain had found temporary
surcease from worry.

She slept until the heat of the sun, high in the heavens, awakened her.
She was rested and now her body was well as her heart was warm. A
sensation of ease and comfort and happiness pervaded her being. She
rose upon her gently swaying couch and stretched luxuriously, her naked
limbs and lithe body mottled by the sunlight filtering through the
foliage above combined with the lazy gesture to impart to her
appearance something of the leopard. With careful eye she scrutinized
the ground below and with attentive ear she listened for any warning
sound that might suggest the near presence of enemies, either man or
beast.  Satisfied at last that there was nothing close of which she
need have fear she clambered to the ground. She wished to bathe but the
lake was too exposed and just a bit too far from the safety of the
trees for her to risk it until she became more familiar with her
surroundings. She wandered aimlessly through the forest searching for
food which she found in abundance. She ate and rested, for she had no
objective as yet. Her freedom was too new to be spoiled by plannings
for the future. The haunts of civilized man seemed to her now as vague
and unattainable as the half-forgotten substance of a dream. If she
could but live on here in peace, waiting, waiting for--HIM. It was the
old hope revived. She knew that he would come some day, if he lived.
She had always known that, though recently she had believed that he
would come too late. If he lived! Yes, he would come if he lived, and
if he did not live she were as well off here as elsewhere, for then
nothing mattered, only to wait for the end as patiently as might be.

Her wanderings brought her to a crystal brook and there she drank and
bathed beneath an overhanging tree that offered her quick asylum in the
event of danger. It was a quiet and beautiful spot and she loved it
from the first. The bottom of the brook was paved with pretty stones
and bits of glassy obsidian. As she gathered a handful of the pebbles
and held them up to look at them she noticed that one of her fingers
was bleeding from a clean, straight cut. She fell to searching for the
cause and presently discovered it in one of the fragments of volcanic
glass which revealed an edge that was almost razor-like. Jane Clayton
was elated. Here, God-given to her hands, was the first beginning with
which she might eventually arrive at both weapons and tools--a cutting
edge. Everything was possible to him who possessed it--nothing without.

She sought until she had collected many of the precious bits of
stone--until the pouch that hung at her right side was almost filled.
Then she climbed into the great tree to examine them at leisure. There
were some that looked like knife blades, and some that could easily be
fashioned into spear heads, and many smaller ones that nature seemed to
have intended for the tips of savage arrows.

The spear she would essay first--that would be easiest. There was a
hollow in the bole of the tree in a great crotch high above the ground.
Here she cached all of her treasure except a single knifelike sliver.
With this she descended to the ground and searching out a slender
sapling that grew arrow-straight she hacked and sawed until she could
break it off without splitting the wood. It was just the right diameter
for the shaft of a spear--a hunting spear such as her beloved Waziri
had liked best.  How often had she watched them fashioning them, and
they had taught her how to use them, too--them and the heavy war
spears--laughing and clapping their hands as her proficiency increased.

She knew the arborescent grasses that yielded the longest and toughest
fibers and these she sought and carried to her tree with the spear
shaft that was to be. Clambering to her crotch she bent to her work,
humming softly a little tune. She caught herself and smiled--it was the
first time in all these bitter months that song had passed her lips or
such a smile.

"I feel," she sighed, "I almost feel that John is near--my John--my
Tarzan!"

She cut the spear shaft to the proper length and removed the twigs and
branches and the bark, whittling and scraping at the nubs until the
surface was all smooth and straight. Then she split one end and
inserted a spear point, shaping the wood until it fitted perfectly.
This done she laid the shaft aside and fell to splitting the thick
grass stems and pounding and twisting them until she had separated and
partially cleaned the fibers. These she took down to the brook and
washed and brought back again and wound tightly around the cleft end of
the shaft, which she had notched to receive them, and the upper part of
the spear head which she had also notched slightly with a bit of stone.
It was a crude spear but the best that she could attain in so short a
time. Later, she promised herself, she should have others--many of
them--and they would be spears of which even the greatest of the Waziri
spear-men might be proud.



18

The Lion Pit of Tu-lur

Though Tarzan searched the outskirts of the city until nearly dawn he
discovered nowhere the spoor of his mate. The breeze coming down from
the mountains brought to his nostrils a diversity of scents but there
was not among them the slightest suggestion of her whom he sought. The
natural deduction was therefore that she had been taken in some other
direction. In his search he had many times crossed the fresh tracks of
many men leading toward the lake and these he concluded had probably
been made by Jane Clayton's abductors. It had only been to minimize the
chance of error by the process of elimination that he had carefully
reconnoitered every other avenue leading from A-lur toward the
southeast where lay Mo-sar's city of Tu-lur, and now he followed the
trail to the shores of Jad-ben-lul where the party had embarked upon
the quiet waters in their sturdy canoes.

He found many other craft of the same description moored along the
shore and one of these he commandeered for the purpose of pursuit. It
was daylight when he passed through the lake which lies next below
Jad-ben-lul and paddling strongly passed within sight of the very tree
in which his lost mate lay sleeping.

Had the gentle wind that caressed the bosom of the lake been blowing
from a southerly direction the giant ape-man and Jane Clayton would
have been reunited then, but an unkind fate had willed otherwise and
the opportunity passed with the passing of his canoe which presently
his powerful strokes carried out of sight into the stream at the lower
end of the lake.

Following the winding river which bore a considerable distance to the
north before doubling back to empty into the Jad-in-lul, the ape-man
missed a portage that would have saved him hours of paddling.

It was at the upper end of this portage where Mo-sar and his warriors
had debarked that the chief discovered the absence of his captive. As
Mo-sar had been asleep since shortly after their departure from A-lur,
and as none of the warriors recalled when she had last been seen, it
was impossible to conjecture with any degree of accuracy the place
where she had escaped. The consensus of opinion was, however, that it
had been in the narrow river connecting Jad-ben-lul with the lake next
below it, which is called Jad-bal-lul, which freely translated means
the lake of gold. Mo-sar had been very wroth and having himself been
the only one at fault he naturally sought with great diligence to fix
the blame upon another.

He would have returned in search of her had he not feared to meet a
pursuing company dispatched either by Ja-don or the high priest, both
of whom, he knew, had just grievances against him.  He would not even
spare a boatload of his warriors from his own protection to return in
quest of the fugitive but hastened onward with as little delay as
possible across the portage and out upon the waters of Jad-in-lul.

The morning sun was just touching the white domes of Tu-lur when
Mo-sar's paddlers brought their canoes against the shore at the city's
edge. Safe once more behind his own walls and protected by many
warriors, the courage of the chief returned sufficiently at least to
permit him to dispatch three canoes in search of Jane Clayton, and also
to go as far as A-lur if possible to learn what had delayed Bu-lot,
whose failure to reach the canoes with the balance of the party at the
time of the flight from the northern city had in no way delayed
Mo-sar's departure, his own safety being of far greater moment than
that of his son.

As the three canoes reached the portage on their return journey the
warriors who were dragging them from the water were suddenly startled
by the appearance of two priests, carrying a light canoe in the
direction of Jad-in-lul. At first they thought them the advance guard
of a larger force of Lu-don's followers, although the correctness of
such a theory was belied by their knowledge that priests never accepted
the risks or perils of a warrior's vocation, nor even fought until
driven into a corner and forced to do so. Secretly the warriors of
Pal-ul-don held the emasculated priesthood in contempt and so instead
of immediately taking up the offensive as they would have had the two
men been warriors from A-lur instead of priests, they waited to
question them.

At sight of the warriors the priests made the sign of peace and upon
being asked if they were alone they answered in the affirmative.

The leader of Mo-sar's warriors permitted them to approach.  "What do
you here," he asked, "in the country of Mo-sar, so far from your own
city?"

"We carry a message from Lu-don, the high priest, to Mo-sar," explained
one.

"Is it a message of peace or of war?" asked the warrior.

"It is an offer of peace," replied the priest.

"And Lu-don is sending no warriors behind you?" queried the fighting
man.

"We are alone," the priest assured him. "None in A-lur save Lu-don
knows that we have come upon this errand."

"Then go your way," said the warrior.

"Who is that?" asked one of the priests suddenly, pointing toward the
upper end of the lake at the point where the river from Jad-bal-lul
entered it.

All eyes turned in the direction that he had indicated to see a lone
warrior paddling rapidly into Jad-in-lul, the prow of his canoe
pointing toward Tu-lur. The warriors and the priests drew into the
concealment of the bushes on either side of the portage.

"It is the terrible man who called himself the Dor-ul-Otho," whispered
one of the priests. "I would know that figure among a great multitude
as far as I could see it."

"You are right, priest," cried one of the warriors who had seen Tarzan
the day that he had first entered Ko-tan's palace. "It is indeed he who
has been rightly called Tarzan-jad-guru."

"Hasten priests," cried the leader of the party. "You are two paddles
in a light canoe. Easily can you reach Tu-lur ahead of him and warn
Mo-sar of his coming, for he has but only entered the lake."

For a moment the priests demurred for they had no stomach for an
encounter with this terrible man, but the warrior insisted and even
went so far as to threaten them. Their canoe was taken from them and
pushed into the lake and they were all but lifted bodily from their
feet and put aboard it. Still protesting they were shoved out upon the
water where they were immediately in full view of the lone paddler
above them. Now there was no alternative. The city of Tu-lur offered
the only safety and bending to their paddles the two priests sent their
craft swiftly in the direction of the city.

The warriors withdrew again to the concealment of the foliage. If
Tarzan had seen them and should come hither to investigate there were
thirty of them against one and naturally they had no fear of the
outcome, but they did not consider it necessary to go out upon the lake
to meet him since they had been sent to look for the escaped prisoner
and not to intercept the strange warrior, the stories of whose ferocity
and prowess doubtless helped them to arrive at their decision to
provoke no uncalled-for quarrel with him.

If he had seen them he gave no sign, but continued paddling steadily
and strongly toward the city, nor did he increase his speed as the two
priests shot out in full view. The moment the priests' canoe touched
the shore by the city its occupants leaped out and hurried swiftly
toward the palace gate, casting affrighted glances behind them. They
sought immediate audience with Mo-sar, after warning the warriors on
guard that Tarzan was approaching.

They were conducted at once to the chief, whose court was a smaller
replica of that of the king of A-lur. "We come from Lu-don, the high
priest," explained the spokesman. "He wishes the friendship of Mo-sar,
who has always been his friend. Ja-don is gathering warriors to make
himself king. Throughout the villages of the Ho-don are thousands who
will obey the commands of Lu-don, the high priest. Only with Lu-don's
assistance can Mo-sar become king, and the message from Lu-don is that
if Mo-sar would retain the friendship of Lu-don he must return
immediately the woman he took from the quarters of the Princess O-lo-a."

At this juncture a warrior entered. His excitement was evident. "The
Dor-ul-Otho has come to Tu-lur and demands to see Mo-sar at once," he
said.

"The Dor-ul-Otho!" exclaimed Mo-sar.

"That is the message he sent," replied the warrior, "and indeed he is
not as are the people of Pal-ul-don. He is, we think, the same of whom
the warriors that returned from A-lur today told us and whom some call
Tarzan-jad-guru and some Dor-ul-Otho. But indeed only the son of god
would dare come thus alone to a strange city, so it must be that he
speaks the truth."

Mo-sar, his heart filled with terror and indecision, turned
questioningly toward the priests.

"Receive him graciously, Mo-sar," counseled he who had spoken before,
his advice prompted by the petty shrewdness of his defective brain
which, under the added influence of Lu-don's tutorage leaned always
toward duplicity. "Receive him graciously and when he is quite
convinced of your friendship he will be off his guard, and then you may
do with him as you will. But if possible, Mo-sar, and you would win the
undying gratitude of Lu-don, the high-priest, save him alive for my
master."

Mo-sar nodded understandingly and turning to the warrior commanded that
he conduct the visitor to him.

"We must not be seen by the creature," said one of the priests. "Give
us your answer to Lu-don, Mo-sar, and we will go our way."

"Tell Lu-don," replied the chief, "that the woman would have been lost
to him entirely had it not been for me. I sought to bring her to Tu-lur
that I might save her for him from the clutches of Ja-don, but during
the night she escaped. Tell Lu-don that I have sent thirty warriors to
search for her. It is strange you did not see them as you came."

"We did," replied the priests, "but they told us nothing of the purpose
of their journey."

"It is as I have told you," said Mo-sar, "and if they find her, assure
your master that she will be kept unharmed in Tu-lur for him. Also tell
him that I will send my warriors to join with his against Ja-don
whenever he sends word that he wants them. Now go, for Tarzan-jad-guru
will soon be here."

He signaled to a slave. "Lead the priests to the temple," he commanded,
"and ask the high priest of Tu-lur to see that they are fed and
permitted to return to A-lur when they will."

The two priests were conducted from the apartment by the slave through
a doorway other than that at which they had entered, and a moment later
Tarzan-jad-guru strode into the presence of Mo-sar, ahead of the
warrior whose duty it had been to conduct and announce him. The ape-man
made no sign of greeting or of peace but strode directly toward the
chief who, only by the exertion of his utmost powers of will, hid the
terror that was in his heart at sight of the giant figure and the
scowling face.

"I am the Dor-ul-Otho," said the ape-man in level tones that carried to
the mind of Mo-sar a suggestion of cold steel; "I am Dor-ul-Otho, and I
come to Tu-lur for the woman you stole from the apartments of O-lo-a,
the princess."

The very boldness of Tarzan's entry into this hostile city had had the
effect of giving him a great moral advantage over Mo-sar and the savage
warriors who stood upon either side of the chief.  Truly it seemed to
them that no other than the son of Jad-ben-Otho would dare so heroic an
act. Would any mortal warrior act thus boldly, and alone enter the
presence of a powerful chief and, in the midst of a score of warriors,
arrogantly demand an accounting? No, it was beyond reason. Mo-sar was
faltering in his decision to betray the stranger by seeming
friendliness. He even paled to a sudden thought--Jad-ben-Otho knew
everything, even our inmost thoughts. Was it not therefore possible
that this creature, if after all it should prove true that he was the
Dor-ul-Otho, might even now be reading the wicked design that the
priests had implanted in the brain of Mo-sar and which he had
entertained so favorably? The chief squirmed and fidgeted upon the
bench of hewn rock that was his throne.

"Quick," snapped the ape-man, "Where is she?"

"She is not here," cried Mo-sar.

"You lie," replied Tarzan.

"As Jad-ben-Otho is my witness, she is not in Tu-lur," insisted the
chief. "You may search the palace and the temple and the entire city
but you will not find her, for she is not here."

"Where is she, then?" demanded the ape-man. "You took her from the
palace at A-lur. If she is not here, where is she? Tell me not that
harm has befallen her," and he took a sudden threatening step toward
Mo-sar, that sent the chief shrinking back in terror.

"Wait," he cried, "if you are indeed the Dor-ul-Otho you will know that
I speak the truth. I took her from the palace of Ko-tan to save her for
Lu-don, the high priest, lest with Ko-tan dead Ja-don seize her. But
during the night she escaped from me between here and A-lur, and I have
but just sent three canoes full-manned in search of her."

Something in the chief's tone and manner assured the ape-man that he
spoke in part the truth, and that once again he had braved incalculable
dangers and suffered loss of time futilely.

"What wanted the priests of Lu-don that preceded me here?" demanded
Tarzan chancing a shrewd guess that the two he had seen paddling so
frantically to avoid a meeting with him had indeed come from the high
priest at A-lur.

"They came upon an errand similar to yours," replied Mo-sar; "to demand
the return of the woman whom Lu-don thought I had stolen from him, thus
wronging me as deeply, O Dor-ul-Otho, as have you."

"I would question the priests," said Tarzan. "Bring them hither." His
peremptory and arrogant manner left Mo-sar in doubt as to whether to be
more incensed, or terrified, but ever as is the way with such as he, he
concluded that the first consideration was his own safety. If he could
transfer the attention and the wrath of this terrible man from himself
to Lu-don's priests it would more than satisfy him and if they should
conspire to harm him, then Mo-sar would be safe in the eyes of
Jad-ben-Otho if it finally developed that the stranger was in reality
the son of god. He felt uncomfortable in Tarzan's presence and this
fact rather accentuated his doubt, for thus indeed would mortal feel in
the presence of a god. Now he saw a way to escape, at least temporarily.

"I will fetch them myself, Dor-ul-Otho," he said, and turning, left the
apartment. His hurried steps brought him quickly to the temple, for the
palace grounds of Tu-lur, which also included the temple as in all of
the Ho-don cities, covered a much smaller area than those of the larger
city of A-lur. He found Lu-don's messengers with the high priest of his
own temple and quickly transmitted to them the commands of the ape-man.

"What do you intend to do with him?" asked one of the priests.

"I have no quarrel with him," replied Mo-sar. "He came in peace and he
may depart in peace, for who knows but that he is indeed the
Dor-ul-Otho?"

"We know that he is not," replied Lu-don's emissary. "We have every
proof that he is only mortal, a strange creature from another country.
Already has Lu-don offered his life to Jad-ben-Otho if he is wrong in
his belief that this creature is not the son of god. If the high priest
of A-lur, who is the highest priest of all the high priests of
Pal-ul-don is thus so sure that the creature is an impostor as to stake
his life upon his judgment then who are we to give credence to the
claims of this stranger? No, Mo-sar, you need not fear him. He is only
a warrior who may be overcome with the same weapons that subdue your
own fighting men. Were it not for Lu-don's command that he be taken
alive I would urge you to set your warriors upon him and slay him, but
the commands of Lu-don are the commands of Jad-ben-Otho himself, and
those we may not disobey."

But still the remnant of a doubt stirred within the cowardly breast of
Mo-sar, urging him to let another take the initiative against the
stranger.

"He is yours then," he replied, "to do with as you will. I have no
quarrel with him. What you may command shall be the command of Lu-don,
the high priest, and further than that I shall have nothing to do in
the matter."

The priests turned to him who guided the destinies of the temple at
Tu-lur. "Have you no plan?" they asked. "High indeed will he stand in
the counsels of Lu-don and in the eyes of Jad-ben-Otho who finds the
means to capture this impostor alive."

"There is the lion pit," whispered the high priest. "It is now vacant
and what will hold JA and JATO will hold this stranger if he is not the
Dor-ul-Otho."

"It will hold him," said Mo-sar; "doubtless too it would hold a GRYF,
but first you would have to get the GRYF into it."

The priests pondered this bit of wisdom thoughtfully and then one of
those from A-lur spoke. "It should not be difficult," he said, "if we
use the wits that Jad-ben-Otho gave us instead of the worldly muscles
which were handed down to us from our fathers and our mothers and which
have not even the power possessed by those of the beasts that run about
on four feet."

"Lu-don matched his wits with the stranger and lost," suggested Mo-sar.
"But this is your own affair. Carry it out as you see best."

"At A-lur, Ko-tan made much of this Dor-ul-Otho and the priests
conducted him through the temple. It would arouse in his mind no
suspicion were you to do the same, and let the high priest of Tu-lur
invite him to the temple and gathering all the priests make a great
show of belief in his kinship to Jad-ben-Otho. And what more natural
then than that the high priest should wish to show him through the
temple as did Lu-don at A-lur when Ko-tan commanded it, and if by
chance he should be led through the lion pit it would be a simple
matter for those who bear the torches to extinguish them suddenly and
before the stranger was aware of what had happened, the stone gates
could be dropped, thus safely securing him."

"But there are windows in the pit that let in light," interposed the
high priest, "and even though the torches were extinguished he could
still see and might escape before the stone door could be lowered."

"Send one who will cover the windows tightly with hides," said the
priest from A-lur.

"The plan is a good one," said Mo-sar, seeing an opportunity for
entirely eliminating himself from any suspicion of complicity, "for it
will require the presence of no warriors, and thus with only priests
about him his mind will entertain no suspicion of harm."

They were interrupted at this point by a messenger from the palace who
brought word that the Dor-ul-Otho was becoming impatient and if the
priests from A-lur were not brought to him at once he would come
himself to the temple and get them. Mo-sar shook his head. He could not
conceive of such brazen courage in mortal breast and glad he was that
the plan evolved for Tarzan's undoing did not necessitate his active
participation.

And so, while Mo-sar left for a secret corner of the palace by a
roundabout way, three priests were dispatched to Tarzan and with
whining words that did not entirely deceive him, they acknowledged his
kinship to Jad-ben-Otho and begged him in the name of the high priest
to honor the temple with a visit, when the priests from A-lur would be
brought to him and would answer any questions that he put to them.

Confident that a continuation of his bravado would best serve his
purpose, and also that if suspicion against him should crystallize into
conviction on the part of Mo-sar and his followers that he would be no
worse off in the temple than in the palace, the ape-man haughtily
accepted the invitation of the high priest.

And so he came into the temple and was received in a manner befitting
his high claims. He questioned the two priests of A-lur from whom he
obtained only a repetition of the story that Mo-sar had told him, and
then the high priest invited him to inspect the temple.

They took him first to the altar court, of which there was only one in
Tu-lur. It was almost identical in every respect with those at A-lur.
There was a bloody altar at the east end and the drowning basin at the
west, and the grizzly fringes upon the headdresses of the priests
attested the fact that the eastern altar was an active force in the
rites of the temple. Through the chambers and corridors beneath they
led him, and finally, with torch bearers to light their steps, into a
damp and gloomy labyrinth at a low level and here in a large chamber,
the air of which was still heavy with the odor of lions, the crafty
priests of Tu-lur encompassed their shrewd design.

The torches were suddenly extinguished. There was a hurried confusion
of bare feet moving rapidly across the stone floor.  There was a loud
crash as of a heavy weight of stone falling upon stone, and then
surrounding the ape-man naught but the darkness and the silence of the
tomb.



19

Diana of the Jungle

Jane had made her first kill and she was very proud of it. It was not a
very formidable animal--only a hare; but it marked an epoch in her
existence. Just as in the dim past the first hunter had shaped the
destinies of mankind so it seemed that this event might shape hers in
some new mold. No longer was she dependent upon the wild fruits and
vegetables for sustenance. Now she might command meat, the giver of the
strength and endurance she would require successfully to cope with the
necessities of her primitive existence.

The next step was fire. She might learn to eat raw flesh as had her
lord and master; but she shrank from that. The thought even was
repulsive. She had, however, a plan for fire. She had given the matter
thought, but had been too busy to put it into execution so long as fire
could be of no immediate use to her.  Now it was different--she had
something to cook and her mouth watered for the flesh of her kill. She
would grill it above glowing embers. Jane hastened to her tree. Among
the treasures she had gathered in the bed of the stream were several
pieces of volcanic glass, clear as crystal. She sought until she had
found the one in mind, which was convex. Then she hurried to the ground
and gathered a little pile of powdered bark that was very dry, and some
dead leaves and grasses that had lain long in the hot sun. Near at hand
she arranged a supply of dead twigs and branches--small and large.

Vibrant with suppressed excitement she held the bit of glass above the
tinder, moving it slowly until she had focused the sun's rays upon a
tiny spot. She waited breathlessly. How slow it was! Were her high
hopes to be dashed in spite of all her clever planning? No! A thin
thread of smoke rose gracefully into the quiet air. Presently the
tinder glowed and broke suddenly into flame. Jane clasped her hands
beneath her chin with a little gurgling exclamation of delight. She had
achieved fire!

She piled on twigs and then larger branches and at last dragged a small
log to the flames and pushed an end of it into the fire which was
crackling merrily. It was the sweetest sound that she had heard for
many a month. But she could not wait for the mass of embers that would
be required to cook her hare. As quickly as might be she skinned and
cleaned her kill, burying the hide and entrails. That she had learned
from Tarzan. It served two purposes. One was the necessity for keeping
a sanitary camp and the other the obliteration of the scent that most
quickly attracts the man-eaters.

Then she ran a stick through the carcass and held it above the flames.
By turning it often she prevented burning and at the same time
permitted the meat to cook thoroughly all the way through. When it was
done she scampered high into the safety of her tree to enjoy her meal
in quiet and peace. Never, thought Lady Greystoke, had aught more
delicious passed her lips. She patted her spear affectionately. It had
brought her this toothsome dainty and with it a feeling of greater
confidence and safety than she had enjoyed since that frightful day
that she and Obergatz had spent their last cartridge. She would never
forget that day--it had seemed one hideous succession of frightful
beast after frightful beast. They had not been long in this strange
country, yet they thought that they were hardened to dangers, for daily
they had had encounters with ferocious creatures; but this day--she
shuddered when she thought of it. And with her last cartridge she had
killed a black and yellow striped lion-thing with great saber teeth
just as it was about to spring upon Obergatz who had futilely emptied
his rifle into it--the last shot--his final cartridge. For another day
they had carried the now useless rifles; but at last they had discarded
them and thrown away the cumbersome bandoleers, as well. How they had
managed to survive during the ensuing week she could never quite
understand, and then the Ho-don had come upon them and captured her.
Obergatz had escaped--she was living it all over again.  Doubtless he
was dead unless he had been able to reach this side of the valley which
was quite evidently less overrun with savage beasts.

Jane's days were very full ones now, and the daylight hours seemed all
too short in which to accomplish the many things she had determined
upon, since she had concluded that this spot presented as ideal a place
as she could find to live until she could fashion the weapons she
considered necessary for the obtaining of meat and for self-defense.

She felt that she must have, in addition to a good spear, a knife, and
bow and arrows. Possibly when these had been achieved she might
seriously consider an attempt to fight her way to one of civilization's
nearest outposts. In the meantime it was necessary to construct some
sort of protective shelter in which she might feel a greater sense of
security by night, for she knew that there was a possibility that any
night she might receive a visit from a prowling panther, although she
had as yet seen none upon this side of the valley. Aside from this
danger she felt comparatively safe in her aerial retreat.

The cutting of the long poles for her home occupied all of the daylight
hours that were not engaged in the search for food.  These poles she
carried high into her tree and with them constructed a flooring across
two stout branches binding the poles together and also to the branches
with fibers from the tough arboraceous grasses that grew in profusion
near the stream.  Similarly she built walls and a roof, the latter
thatched with many layers of great leaves. The fashioning of the barred
windows and the door were matters of great importance and consuming
interest. The windows, there were two of them, were large and the bars
permanently fixed; but the door was small, the opening just large
enough to permit her to pass through easily on hands and knees, which
made it easier to barricade. She lost count of the days that the house
cost her; but time was a cheap commodity--she had more of it than of
anything else. It meant so little to her that she had not even any
desire to keep account of it. How long since she and Obergatz had fled
from the wrath of the Negro villagers she did not know and she could
only roughly guess at the seasons. She worked hard for two reasons; one
was to hasten the completion of her little place of refuge, and the
other a desire for such physical exhaustion at night that she would
sleep through those dreaded hours to a new day. As a matter of fact the
house was finished in less than a week--that is, it was made as safe as
it ever would be, though regardless of how long she might occupy it she
would keep on adding touches and refinements here and there.

Her daily life was filled with her house building and her hunting, to
which was added an occasional spice of excitement contributed by roving
lions. To the woodcraft that she had learned from Tarzan, that master
of the art, was added a considerable store of practical experience
derived from her own past adventures in the jungle and the long months
with Obergatz, nor was any day now lacking in some added store of
useful knowledge. To these facts was attributable her apparent immunity
from harm, since they told her when JA was approaching before he crept
close enough for a successful charge and, too, they kept her close to
those never-failing havens of retreat--the trees.

The nights, filled with their weird noises, were lonely and depressing.
Only her ability to sleep quickly and soundly made them endurable. The
first night that she spent in her completed house behind barred windows
and barricaded door was one of almost undiluted peace and happiness.
The night noises seemed far removed and impersonal and the soughing of
the wind in the trees was gently soothing. Before, it had carried a
mournful note and was sinister in that it might hide the approach of
some real danger. That night she slept indeed.

She went further afield now in search of food. So far nothing but
rodents had fallen to her spear--her ambition was an antelope, since
beside the flesh it would give her, and the gut for her bow, the hide
would prove invaluable during the colder weather that she knew would
accompany the rainy season. She had caught glimpses of these wary
animals and was sure that they always crossed the stream at a certain
spot above her camp. It was to this place that she went to hunt them.
With the stealth and cunning of a panther she crept through the forest,
circling about to get up wind from the ford, pausing often to look and
listen for aught that might menace her--herself the personification of
a hunted deer. Now she moved silently down upon the chosen spot.  What
luck! A beautiful buck stood drinking in the stream. The woman wormed
her way closer. Now she lay upon her belly behind a small bush within
throwing distance of the quarry. She must rise to her full height and
throw her spear almost in the same instant and she must throw it with
great force and perfect accuracy. She thrilled with the excitement of
the minute, yet cool and steady were her swift muscles as she rose and
cast her missile. Scarce by the width of a finger did the point strike
from the spot at which it had been directed. The buck leaped high,
landed upon the bank of the stream, and fell dead. Jane Clayton sprang
quickly forward toward her kill.

"Bravo!" A man's voice spoke in English from the shrubbery upon the
opposite side of the stream. Jane Clayton halted in her
tracks--stunned, almost, by surprise. And then a strange, unkempt
figure of a man stepped into view. At first she did not recognize him,
but when she did, instinctively she stepped back.

"Lieutenant Obergatz!" she cried. "Can it be you?"

"It can. It is," replied the German. "I am a strange sight, no doubt;
but still it is I, Erich Obergatz. And you? You have changed too, is it
not?"

He was looking at her naked limbs and her golden breastplates, the loin
cloth of JATO-hide, the harness and ornaments that constitute the
apparel of a Ho-don woman--the things that Lu-don had dressed her in as
his passion for her grew. Not Ko-tan's daughter, even, had finer
trappings.

"But why are you here?" Jane insisted. "I had thought you safely among
civilized men by this time, if you still lived."

"Gott!" he exclaimed. "I do not know why I continue to live. I have
prayed to die and yet I cling to life. There is no hope. We are doomed
to remain in this horrible land until we die. The bog! The frightful
bog! I have searched its shores for a place to cross until I have
entirely circled the hideous country. Easily enough we entered; but the
rains have come since and now no living man could pass that slough of
slimy mud and hungry reptiles. Have I not tried it! And the beasts that
roam this accursed land. They hunt me by day and by night."

"But how have you escaped them?" she asked.

"I do not know," he replied gloomily. "I have fled and fled and fled. I
have remained hungry and thirsty in tree tops for days at a time. I
have fashioned weapons--clubs and spears--and I have learned to use
them. I have slain a lion with my club. So even will a cornered rat
fight. And we are no better than rats in this land of stupendous
dangers, you and I. But tell me about yourself. If it is surprising
that I live, how much more so that you still survive."

Briefly she told him and all the while she was wondering what she might
do to rid herself of him. She could not conceive of a prolonged
existence with him as her sole companion. Better, a thousand times
better, to be alone. Never had her hatred and contempt for him lessened
through the long weeks and months of their constant companionship, and
now that he could be of no service in returning her to civilization,
she shrank from the thought of seeing him daily. And, too, she feared
him. Never had she trusted him; but now there was a strange light in
his eye that had not been there when last she saw him. She could not
interpret it--all she knew was that it gave her a feeling of
apprehension--a nameless dread.

"You lived long then in the city of A-lur?" he said, speaking in the
language of Pal-ul-don.

"You have learned this tongue?" she asked. "How?"

"I fell in with a band of half-breeds," he replied, "members of a
proscribed race that dwells in the rock-bound gut through which the
principal river of the valley empties into the morass. They are called
Waz-ho-don and their village is partly made up of cave dwellings and
partly of houses carved from the soft rock at the foot of the cliff.
They are very ignorant and superstitious and when they first saw me and
realized that I had no tail and that my hands and feet were not like
theirs they were afraid of me.  They thought that I was either god or
demon. Being in a position where I could neither escape them nor defend
myself, I made a bold front and succeeded in impressing them to such an
extent that they conducted me to their city, which they call Bu-lur,
and there they fed me and treated me with kindness. As I learned their
language I sought to impress them more and more with the idea that I
was a god, and I succeeded, too, until an old fellow who was something
of a priest among them, or medicine-man, became jealous of my growing
power. That was the beginning of the end and came near to being the end
in fact. He told them that if I was a god I would not bleed if a knife
was stuck into me--if I did bleed it would prove conclusively that I
was not a god.  Without my knowledge he arranged to stage the ordeal
before the whole village upon a certain night--it was upon one of those
numerous occasions when they eat and drink to Jad-ben-Otho, their pagan
deity. Under the influence of their vile liquor they would be ripe for
any bloodthirsty scheme the medicine-man might evolve. One of the women
told me about the plan--not with any intent to warn me of danger, but
prompted merely by feminine curiosity as to whether or not I would
bleed if stuck with a dagger. She could not wait, it seemed, for the
orderly procedure of the ordeal--she wanted to know at once, and when I
caught her trying to slip a knife into my side and questioned her she
explained the whole thing with the utmost naivete.  The warriors
already had commenced drinking--it would have been futile to make any
sort of appeal either to their intellects or their superstitions. There
was but one alternative to death and that was flight. I told the woman
that I was very much outraged and offended at this reflection upon my
godhood and that as a mark of my disfavor I should abandon them to
their fate.

"'I shall return to heaven at once!' I exclaimed.

"She wanted to hang around and see me go, but I told her that her eyes
would be blasted by the fire surrounding my departure and that she must
leave at once and not return to the spot for at least an hour. I also
impressed upon her the fact that should any other approach this part of
the village within that time not only they, but she as well, would
burst into flames and be consumed.

"She was very much impressed and lost no time in leaving, calling back
as she departed that if I were indeed gone in an hour she and all the
village would know that I was no less than Jad-ben-Otho himself, and so
they must think me, for I can assure you that I was gone in much less
than an hour, nor have I ventured close to the neighborhood of the city
of Bu-lur since," and he fell to laughing in harsh, cackling notes that
sent a shiver through the woman's frame.

As Obergatz talked Jane had recovered her spear from the carcass of the
antelope and commenced busying herself with the removal of the hide.
The man made no attempt to assist her, but stood by talking and
watching her, the while he continually ran his filthy fingers through
his matted hair and beard. His face and body were caked with dirt and
he was naked except for a torn greasy hide about his loins. His weapons
consisted of a club and knife of Waz-don pattern, that he had stolen
from the city of Bu-lur; but what more greatly concerned the woman than
his filth or his armament were his cackling laughter and the strange
expression in his eyes.

She went on with her work, however, removing those parts of the buck
she wanted, taking only as much meat as she might consume before it
spoiled, as she was not sufficiently a true jungle creature to relish
it beyond that stage, and then she straightened up and faced the man.

"Lieutenant Obergatz," she said, "by a chance of accident we have met
again. Certainly you would not have sought the meeting any more than I.
We have nothing in common other than those sentiments which may have
been engendered by my natural dislike and suspicion of you, one of the
authors of all the misery and sorrow that I have endured for endless
months. This little corner of the world is mine by right of discovery
and occupation. Go away and leave me to enjoy here what peace I may. It
is the least that you can do to amend the wrong that you have done me
and mine."

The man stared at her through his fishy eyes for a moment in silence,
then there broke from his lips a peal of mirthless, uncanny laughter.

"Go away! Leave you alone!" he cried. "I have found you. We are going
to be good friends. There is no one else in the world but us. No one
will ever know what we do or what becomes of us and now you ask me to
go away and live alone in this hellish solitude." Again he laughed,
though neither the muscles of his eyes or his mouth reflected any
mirth--it was just a hollow sound that imitated laughter.

"Remember your promise," she said.

"Promise! Promise! What are promises? They are made to be broken--we
taught the world that at Liege and Louvain.  No, no! I will not go
away. I shall stay and protect you."

"I do not need your protection," she insisted. "You have already seen
that I can use a spear."

"Yes," he said; "but it would not be right to leave you here alone--you
are but a woman. No, no; I am an officer of the Kaiser and I cannot
abandon you."

Once more he laughed. "We could be very happy here together," he added.

The woman could not repress a shudder, nor, in fact, did she attempt to
hide her aversion.

"You do not like me?" he asked. "Ah, well; it is too sad. But some day
you will love me," and again the hideous laughter.

The woman had wrapped the pieces of the buck in the hide and this she
now raised and threw across her shoulder. In her other hand she held
her spear and faced the German.

"Go!" she commanded. "We have wasted enough words. This is my country
and I shall defend it. If I see you about again I shall kill you. Do
you understand?"

An expression of rage contorted Obergatz' features. He raised his club
and started toward her.

"Stop!" she commanded, throwing her spear-hand backward for a cast.
"You saw me kill this buck and you have said truthfully that no one
will ever know what we do here. Put these two facts together, German,
and draw your own conclusions before you take another step in my
direction."

The man halted and his club-hand dropped to his side. "Come," he begged
in what he intended as a conciliatory tone. "Let us be friends, Lady
Greystoke. We can be of great assistance to each other and I promise
not to harm you."

"Remember Liege and Louvain," she reminded him with a sneer. "I am
going now--be sure that you do not follow me. As far as you can walk in
a day from this spot in any direction you may consider the limits of my
domain. If ever again I see you within these limits I shall kill you."

There could be no question that she meant what she said and the man
seemed convinced for he but stood sullenly eyeing her as she backed
from sight beyond a turn in the game trail that crossed the ford where
they had met, and disappeared in the forest.



20

Silently in the Night

In A-lur the fortunes of the city had been tossed from hand to hand.
The party of Ko-tan's loyal warriors that Tarzan had led to the
rendezvous at the entrance to the secret passage below the palace gates
had met with disaster. Their first rush had been met with soft words
from the priests. They had been exhorted to defend the faith of their
fathers from blasphemers. Ja-don was painted to them as a defiler of
temples, and the wrath of Jad-ben-Otho was prophesied for those who
embraced his cause. The priests insisted that Lu-don's only wish was to
prevent the seizure of the throne by Ja-don until a new king could be
chosen according to the laws of the Ho-don.

The result was that many of the palace warriors joined their fellows of
the city, and when the priests saw that those whom they could influence
outnumbered those who remained loyal to the palace, they caused the
former to fall upon the latter with the result that many were killed
and only a handful succeeded in reaching the safety of the palace
gates, which they quickly barred.

The priests led their own forces through the secret passageway into the
temple, while some of the loyal ones sought out Ja-don and told him all
that had happened. The fight in the banquet hall had spread over a
considerable portion of the palace grounds and had at last resulted in
the temporary defeat of those who had opposed Ja-don. This force,
counseled by under priests sent for the purpose by Lu-don, had
withdrawn within the temple grounds so that now the issue was plainly
marked as between Ja-don on the one side and Lu-don on the other.

The former had been told of all that had occurred in the apartments of
O-lo-a to whose safety he had attended at the first opportunity and he
had also learned of Tarzan's part in leading his men to the gathering
of Lu-don's warriors.

These things had naturally increased the old warrior's former
inclinations of friendliness toward the ape-man, and now he regretted
that the other had departed from the city.

The testimony of O-lo-a and Pan-at-lee was such as to strengthen
whatever belief in the godliness of the stranger Ja-don and others of
the warriors had previously entertained, until presently there appeared
a strong tendency upon the part of this palace faction to make the
Dor-ul-otho an issue of their original quarrel with Lu-don. Whether
this occurred as the natural sequence to repeated narrations of the
ape-man's exploits, which lost nothing by repetition, in conjunction
with Lu-don's enmity toward him, or whether it was the shrewd design of
some wily old warrior such as Ja-don, who realized the value of adding
a religious cause to their temporal one, it were difficult to
determine; but the fact remained that Ja-don's followers developed
bitter hatred for the followers of Lu-don because of the high priest's
antagonism to Tarzan.

Unfortunately however Tarzan was not there to inspire the followers of
Ja-don with the holy zeal that might have quickly settled the dispute
in the old chieftain's favor. Instead, he was miles away and because
their repeated prayers for his presence were unanswered, the weaker
spirits among them commenced to suspect that their cause did not have
divine favor. There was also another and a potent cause for defection
from the ranks of Ja-don. It emanated from the city where the friends
and relatives of the palace warriors, who were largely also the friends
and relatives of Lu-don's forces, found the means, urged on by the
priesthood, to circulate throughout the palace pernicious propaganda
aimed at Ja-don's cause.

The result was that Lu-don's power increased while that of Ja-don
waned. Then followed a sortie from the temple which resulted in the
defeat of the palace forces, and though they were able to withdraw in
decent order withdraw they did, leaving the palace to Lu-don, who was
now virtually ruler of Pal-ul-don.

Ja-don, taking with him the princess, her women, and their slaves,
including Pan-at-lee, as well as the women and children of his faithful
followers, retreated not only from the palace but from the city of
A-lur as well and fell back upon his own city of Ja-lur. Here he
remained, recruiting his forces from the surrounding villages of the
north which, being far removed from the influence of the priesthood of
A-lur, were enthusiastic partisans in any cause that the old chieftain
espoused, since for years he had been revered as their friend and
protector.

And while these events were transpiring in the north, Tarzan-jad-guru
lay in the lion pit at Tu-lur while messengers passed back and forth
between Mo-sar and Lu-don as the two dickered for the throne of
Pal-ul-don. Mo-sar was cunning enough to guess that should an open
breach occur between himself and the high priest he might use his
prisoner to his own advantage, for he had heard whisperings among even
his own people that suggested that there were those who were more than
a trifle inclined to belief in the divinity of the stranger and that he
might indeed be the Dor-ul-Otho. Lu-don wanted Tarzan himself. He
wanted to sacrifice him upon the eastern altar with his own hands
before a multitude of people, since he was not without evidence that
his own standing and authority had been lessened by the claims of the
bold and heroic figure of the stranger.

The method that the high priest of Tu-lur had employed to trap Tarzan
had left the ape-man in possession of his weapons though there seemed
little likelihood of their being of any service to him. He also had his
pouch, in which were the various odds and ends which are the natural
accumulation of all receptacles from a gold meshbag to an attic. There
were bits of obsidian and choice feathers for arrows, some pieces of
flint and a couple of steel, an old knife, a heavy bone needle, and
strips of dried gut.  Nothing very useful to you or me, perhaps; but
nothing useless to the savage life of the ape-man.

When Tarzan realized the trick that had been so neatly played upon him
he had awaited expectantly the coming of the lion, for though the scent
of JA was old he was sure that sooner or later they would let one of
the beasts in upon him. His first consideration was a thorough
exploration of his prison. He had noticed the hide-covered windows and
these he immediately uncovered, letting in the light, and revealing the
fact that though the chamber was far below the level of the temple
courts it was yet many feet above the base of the hill from which the
temple was hewn. The windows were so closely barred that he could not
see over the edge of the thick wall in which they were cut to determine
what lay close in below him. At a little distance were the blue waters
of Jad-in-lul and beyond, the verdure-clad farther shore, and beyond
that the mountains. It was a beautiful picture upon which he looked--a
picture of peace and harmony and quiet.  Nor anywhere a slightest
suggestion of the savage men and beasts that claimed this lovely
landscape as their own. What a paradise!  And some day civilized man
would come and--spoil it! Ruthless axes would raze that age-old wood;
black, sticky smoke would rise from ugly chimneys against that azure
sky; grimy little boats with wheels behind or upon either side would
churn the mud from the bottom of Jad-in-lul, turning its blue waters to
a dirty brown; hideous piers would project into the lake from squalid
buildings of corrugated iron, doubtless, for of such are the pioneer
cities of the world.

But would civilized man come? Tarzan hoped not. For countless
generations civilization had ramped about the globe; it had dispatched
its emissaries to the North Pole and the South; it had circled
Pal-ul-don once, perhaps many times, but it had never touched her. God
grant that it never would. Perhaps He was saving this little spot to be
always just as He had made it, for the scratching of the Ho-don and the
Waz-don upon His rocks had not altered the fair face of Nature.

Through the windows came sufficient light to reveal the whole interior
to Tarzan. The room was fairly large and there was a door at each
end--a large door for men and a smaller one for lions. Both were closed
with heavy masses of stone that had been lowered in grooves running to
the floor. The two windows were small and closely barred with the first
iron that Tarzan had seen in Pal-ul-don. The bars were let into holes
in the casing, and the whole so strongly and neatly contrived that
escape seemed impossible. Yet within a few minutes of his incarceration
Tarzan had commenced to undertake his escape. The old knife in his
pouch was brought into requisition and slowly the ape-man began to
scrape and chip away the stone from about the bars of one of the
windows. It was slow work but Tarzan had the patience of absolute
health.

Each day food and water were brought him and slipped quickly beneath
the smaller door which was raised just sufficiently to allow the stone
receptacles to pass in. The prisoner began to believe that he was being
preserved for something beside lions.  However that was immaterial. If
they would but hold off for a few more days they might select what fate
they would--he would not be there when they arrived to announce it.

And then one day came Pan-sat, Lu-don's chief tool, to the city of
Tu-lur. He came ostensibly with a fair message for Mo-sar from the high
priest at A-lur. Lu-don had decided that Mo-sar should be king and he
invited Mo-sar to come at once to A-lur and then Pan-sat, having
delivered the message, asked that he might go to the temple of Tu-lur
and pray, and there he sought the high priest of Tu-lur to whom was the
true message that Lu-don had sent. The two were closeted alone in a
little chamber and Pan-sat whispered into the ear of the high priest.

"Mo-sar wishes to be king," he said, "and Lu-don wishes to be king.
Mo-sar wishes to retain the stranger who claims to be the Dor-ul-Otho
and Lu-don wishes to kill him, and now," he leaned even closer to the
ear of the high priest of Tu-lur, "if you would be high priest at A-lur
it is within your power."

Pan-sat ceased speaking and waited for the other's reply. The high
priest was visibly affected. To be high priest at A-lur!  That was
almost as good as being king of all Pal-ul-don, for great were the
powers of him who conducted the sacrifices upon the altars of A-lur.

"How?" whispered the high priest. "How may I become high priest at
A-lur?"

Again Pan-sat leaned close: "By killing the one and bringing the other
to A-lur," replied he. Then he rose and departed knowing that the other
had swallowed the bait and could be depended upon to do whatever was
required to win him the great prize.

Nor was Pan-sat mistaken other than in one trivial consideration. This
high priest would indeed commit murder and treason to attain the high
office at A-lur; but he had misunderstood which of his victims was to
be killed and which to be delivered to Lu-don. Pan-sat, knowing himself
all the details of the plannings of Lu-don, had made the quite natural
error of assuming that the other was perfectly aware that only by
publicly sacrificing the false Dor-ul-Otho could the high priest at
A-lur bolster his waning power and that the assassination of Mo-sar,
the pretender, would remove from Lu-don's camp the only obstacle to his
combining the offices of high priest and king. The high priest at
Tu-lur thought that he had been commissioned to kill Tarzan and bring
Mo-sar to A-lur. He also thought that when he had done these things he
would be made high priest at A-lur; but he did not know that already
the priest had been selected who was to murder him within the hour that
he arrived at A-lur, nor did he know that a secret grave had been
prepared for him in the floor of a subterranean chamber in the very
temple he dreamed of controlling.

And so when he should have been arranging the assassination of his
chief he was leading a dozen heavily bribed warriors through the dark
corridors beneath the temple to slay Tarzan in the lion pit. Night had
fallen. A single torch guided the footsteps of the murderers as they
crept stealthily upon their evil way, for they knew that they were
doing the thing that their chief did not want done and their guilty
consciences warned them to stealth.

In the dark of his cell the ape-man worked at his seemingly endless
chipping and scraping. His keen ears detected the coming of footsteps
along the corridor without--footsteps that approached the larger door.
Always before had they come to the smaller door--the footsteps of a
single slave who brought his food. This time there were many more than
one and their coming at this time of night carried a sinister
suggestion. Tarzan continued to work at his scraping and chipping. He
heard them stop beyond the door. All was silence broken only by the
scrape, scrape, scrape of the ape-man's tireless blade.

Those without heard it and listening sought to explain it. They
whispered in low tones making their plans. Two would raise the door
quickly and the others would rush in and hurl their clubs at the
prisoner. They would take no chances, for the stories that had
circulated in A-lur had been brought to Tu-lur--stories of the great
strength and wonderful prowess of Tarzan-jad-guru that caused the sweat
to stand upon the brows of the warriors, though it was cool in the damp
corridor and they were twelve to one.

And then the high priest gave the signal--the door shot upward and ten
warriors leaped into the chamber with poised clubs. Three of the heavy
weapons flew across the room toward a darker shadow that lay in the
shadow of the opposite wall, then the flare of the torch in the
priest's hand lighted the interior and they saw that the thing at which
they had flung their clubs was a pile of skins torn from the windows
and that except for themselves the chamber was vacant.

One of them hastened to a window. All but a single bar was gone and to
this was tied one end of a braided rope fashioned from strips cut from
the leather window hangings.

To the ordinary dangers of Jane Clayton's existence was now added the
menace of Obergatz' knowledge of her whereabouts. The lion and the
panther had given her less cause for anxiety than did the return of the
unscrupulous Hun, whom she had always distrusted and feared, and whose
repulsiveness was now immeasurably augmented by his unkempt and filthy
appearance, his strange and mirthless laughter, and his unnatural
demeanor. She feared him now with a new fear as though he had suddenly
become the personification of some nameless horror. The wholesome,
outdoor life that she had been leading had strengthened and rebuilt her
nervous system yet it seemed to her as she thought of him that if this
man should ever touch her she should scream, and, possibly, even faint.
Again and again during the day following their unexpected meeting the
woman reproached herself for not having killed him as she would JA or
JATO or any other predatory beast that menaced her existence or her
safety. There was no attempt at self-justification for these sinister
reflections--they needed no justification. The standards by which the
acts of such as you or I may be judged could not apply to hers. We have
recourse to the protection of friends and relatives and the civil
soldiery that upholds the majesty of the law and which may be invoked
to protect the righteous weak against the unrighteous strong; but Jane
Clayton comprised within herself not only the righteous weak but all
the various agencies for the protection of the weak. To her, then,
Lieutenant Erich Obergatz presented no different problem than did JA,
the lion, other than that she considered the former the more dangerous
animal. And so she determined that should he ignore her warning there
would be no temporizing upon the occasion of their next meeting--the
same swift spear that would meet JA's advances would meet his.

That night her snug little nest perched high in the great tree seemed
less the sanctuary that it had before. What might resist the sanguinary
intentions of a prowling panther would prove no great barrier to man,
and influenced by this thought she slept less well than before. The
slightest noise that broke the monotonous hum of the nocturnal jungle
startled her into alert wakefulness to lie with straining ears in an
attempt to classify the origin of the disturbance, and once she was
awakened thus by a sound that seemed to come from something moving in
her own tree. She listened intently--scarce breathing. Yes, there it
was again. A scuffing of something soft against the hard bark of the
tree. The woman reached out in the darkness and grasped her spear. Now
she felt a slight sagging of one of the limbs that supported her
shelter as though the thing, whatever it was, was slowly raising its
weight to the branch. It came nearer. Now she thought that she could
detect its breathing. It was at the door.  She could hear it fumbling
with the frail barrier. What could it be? It made no sound by which she
might identify it. She raised herself upon her hands and knees and
crept stealthily the little distance to the doorway, her spear clutched
tightly in her hand.  Whatever the thing was, it was evidently
attempting to gain entrance without awakening her. It was just beyond
the pitiful little contraption of slender boughs that she had bound
together with grasses and called a door--only a few inches lay between
the thing and her. Rising to her knees she reached out with her left
hand and felt until she found a place where a crooked branch had left
an opening a couple of inches wide near the center of the barrier. Into
this she inserted the point of her spear. The thing must have heard her
move within for suddenly it abandoned its efforts for stealth and tore
angrily at the obstacle. At the same moment Jane thrust her spear
forward with all her strength. She felt it enter flesh. There was a
scream and a curse from without, followed by the crashing of a body
through limbs and foliage. Her spear was almost dragged from her grasp,
but she held to it until it broke free from the thing it had pierced.

It was Obergatz; the curse had told her that. From below came no
further sound. Had she, then, killed him? She prayed so--with all her
heart she prayed it. To be freed from the menace of this loathsome
creature were relief indeed. During all the balance of the night she
lay there awake, listening. Below her, she imagined, she could see the
dead man with his hideous face bathed in the cold light of the
moon--lying there upon his back staring up at her.

She prayed that JA might come and drag it away, but all during the
remainder of the night she heard never another sound above the drowsy
hum of the jungle. She was glad that he was dead, but she dreaded the
gruesome ordeal that awaited her on the morrow, for she must bury the
thing that had been Erich Obergatz and live on there above the shallow
grave of the man she had slain.

She reproached herself for her weakness, repeating over and over that
she had killed in self-defense, that her act was justified; but she was
still a woman of today, and strong upon her were the iron mandates of
the social order from which she had sprung, its interdictions and its
superstitions.

At last came the tardy dawn. Slowly the sun topped the distant
mountains beyond Jad-in-lul. And yet she hesitated to loosen the
fastenings of her door and look out upon the thing below. But it must
be done. She steeled herself and untied the rawhide thong that secured
the barrier. She looked down and only the grass and the flowers looked
up at her. She came from her shelter and examined the ground upon the
opposite side of the tree--there was no dead man there, nor anywhere as
far as she could see. Slowly she descended, keeping a wary eye and an
alert ear ready for the first intimation of danger.

At the foot of the tree was a pool of blood and a little trail of
crimson drops upon the grass, leading away parallel with the shore of
Jad-ben-lul. Then she had not slain him! She was vaguely aware of a
peculiar, double sensation of relief and regret. Now she would be
always in doubt. He might return; but at least she would not have to
live above his grave.

She thought some of following the bloody spoor on the chance that he
might have crawled away to die later, but she gave up the idea for fear
that she might find him dead nearby, or, worse yet badly wounded. What
then could she do? She could not finish him with her spear--no, she
knew that she could not do that, nor could she bring him back and nurse
him, nor could she leave him there to die of hunger or of thirst, or to
become the prey of some prowling beast. It were better then not to
search for him for fear that she might find him.

That day was one of nervous starting to every sudden sound. The day
before she would have said that her nerves were of iron; but not today.
She knew now the shock that she had suffered and that this was the
reaction. Tomorrow it might be different, but something told her that
never again would her little shelter and the patch of forest and jungle
that she called her own be the same. There would hang over them always
the menace of this man.  No longer would she pass restful nights of
deep slumber. The peace of her little world was shattered forever.

That night she made her door doubly secure with additional thongs of
rawhide cut from the pelt of the buck she had slain the day that she
met Obergatz. She was very tired for she had lost much sleep the night
before; but for a long time she lay with wide-open eyes staring into
the darkness. What saw she there?  Visions that brought tears to those
brave and beautiful eyes--visions of a rambling bungalow that had been
home to her and that was no more, destroyed by the same cruel force
that haunted her even now in this remote, uncharted corner of the
earth; visions of a strong man whose protecting arm would never press
her close again; visions of a tall, straight son who looked at her
adoringly out of brave, smiling eyes that were like his father's.
Always the vision of the crude simple bungalow rather than of the
stately halls that had been as much a part of her life as the other.
But he had loved the bungalow and the broad, free acres best and so she
had come to love them best, too.

At last she slept, the sleep of utter exhaustion. How long it lasted
she did not know; but suddenly she was wide awake and once again she
heard the scuffing of a body against the bark of her tree and again the
limb bent to a heavy weight. He had returned! She went cold, trembling
as with ague. Was it he, or, O God! had she killed him then and was
this--? She tried to drive the horrid thought from her mind, for this
way, she knew, lay madness.

And once again she crept to the door, for the thing was outside just as
it had been last night. Her hands trembled as she placed the point of
her weapon to the opening. She wondered if it would scream as it fell.



21

The Maniac

The last bar that would make the opening large enough to permit his
body to pass had been removed as Tarzan heard the warriors whispering
beyond the stone door of his prison. Long since had the rope of hide
been braided. To secure one end to the remaining bar that he had left
for this purpose was the work of but a moment, and while the warriors
whispered without, the brown body of the ape-man slipped through the
small aperture and disappeared below the sill.

Tarzan's escape from the cell left him still within the walled area
that comprised the palace and temple grounds and buildings. He had
reconnoitered as best he might from the window after he had removed
enough bars to permit him to pass his head through the opening, so that
he knew what lay immediately before him--a winding and usually deserted
alleyway leading in the direction of the outer gate that opened from
the palace grounds into the city.

The darkness would facilitate his escape. He might even pass out of the
palace and the city without detection. If he could elude the guard at
the palace gate the rest would be easy. He strode along confidently,
exhibiting no fear of detection, for he reasoned that thus would he
disarm suspicion. In the darkness he easily could pass for a Ho-don and
in truth, though he passed several after leaving the deserted alley, no
one accosted or detained him, and thus he came at last to the guard of
a half-dozen warriors before the palace gate. These he attempted to
pass in the same unconcerned fashion and he might have succeeded had it
not been for one who came running rapidly from the direction of the
temple shouting: "Let no one pass the gates! The prisoner has escaped
from the pal-ul-JA!"

Instantly a warrior barred his way and simultaneously the fellow
recognized him. "Xot tor!" he exclaimed: "Here he is now. Fall upon
him! Fall upon him! Back! Back before I kill you."

The others came forward. It cannot be said that they rushed forward. If
it was their wish to fall upon him there was a noticeable lack of
enthusiasm other than that which directed their efforts to persuade
someone else to fall upon him. His fame as a fighter had been too long
a topic of conversation for the good of the morale of Mo-sar's
warriors. It were safer to stand at a distance and hurl their clubs and
this they did, but the ape-man had learned something of the use of this
weapon since he had arrived in Pal-ul-don. And as he learned great had
grown his respect for this most primitive of arms. He had come to
realize that the black savages he had known had never appreciated the
possibilities of their knob sticks, nor had he, and he had discovered,
too, why the Pal-ul-donians had turned their ancient spears into
plowshares and pinned their faith to the heavy-ended club alone. In
deadly execution it was far more effective than a spear and it
answered, too, every purpose of a shield, combining the two in one and
thus reducing the burden of the warrior.  Thrown as they throw it,
after the manner of the hammer-throwers of the Olympian games, an
ordinary shield would prove more a weakness than a strength while one
that would be strong enough to prove a protection would be too heavy to
carry. Only another club, deftly wielded to deflect the course of an
enemy missile, is in any way effective against these formidable weapons
and, too, the war club of Pal-ul-don can be thrown with accuracy a far
greater distance than any spear.

And now was put to the test that which Tarzan had learned from Om-at
and Ta-den. His eyes and his muscles trained by a lifetime of necessity
moved with the rapidity of light and his brain functioned with an
uncanny celerity that suggested nothing less than prescience, and these
things more than compensated for his lack of experience with the war
club he handled so dexterously.  Weapon after weapon he warded off and
always he moved with a single idea in mind--to place himself within
reach of one of his antagonists. But they were wary for they feared
this strange creature to whom the superstitious fears of many of them
attributed the miraculous powers of deity. They managed to keep between
Tarzan and the gateway and all the time they bawled lustily for
reinforcements. Should these come before he had made his escape the
ape-man realized that the odds against him would be unsurmountable, and
so he redoubled his efforts to carry out his design.

Following their usual tactics two or three of the warriors were always
circling behind him collecting the thrown clubs when Tarzan's attention
was directed elsewhere. He himself retrieved several of them which he
hurled with such deadly effect as to dispose of two of his antagonists,
but now he heard the approach of hurrying warriors, the patter of their
bare feet upon the stone pavement and then the savage cries which were
to bolster the courage of their fellows and fill the enemy with fear.

There was no time to lose. Tarzan held a club in either hand and,
swinging one he hurled it at a warrior before him and as the man dodged
he rushed in and seized him, at the same time casting his second club
at another of his opponents. The Ho-don with whom he grappled reached
instantly for his knife but the ape-man grasped his wrist. There was a
sudden twist, the snapping of a bone and an agonized scream, then the
warrior was lifted bodily from his feet and held as a shield between
his fellows and the fugitive as the latter backed through the gateway.
Beside Tarzan stood the single torch that lighted the entrance to the
palace grounds. The warriors were advancing to the succor of their
fellow when the ape-man raised his captive high above his head and
flung him full in the face of the foremost attacker. The fellow went
down and two directly behind him sprawled headlong over their companion
as the ape-man seized the torch and cast it back into the palace
grounds to be extinguished as it struck the bodies of those who led the
charging reinforcements.

In the ensuing darkness Tarzan disappeared in the streets of Tu-lur
beyond the palace gate. For a time he was aware of sounds of pursuit
but the fact that they trailed away and died in the direction of
Jad-in-lul informed him that they were searching in the wrong
direction, for he had turned south out of Tu-lur purposely to throw
them off his track. Beyond the outskirts of the city he turned directly
toward the northwest, in which direction lay A-lur.

In his path he knew lay Jad-bal-lul, the shore of which he was
compelled to skirt, and there would be a river to cross at the lower
end of the great lake upon the shores of which lay A-lur. What other
obstacles lay in his way he did not know but he believed that he could
make better time on foot than by attempting to steal a canoe and force
his way up stream with a single paddle. It was his intention to put as
much distance as possible between himself and Tu-lur before he slept
for he was sure that Mo-sar would not lightly accept his loss, but that
with the coming of day, or possibly even before, he would dispatch
warriors in search of him.

A mile or two from the city he entered a forest and here at last he
felt such a measure of safety as he never knew in open spaces or in
cities. The forest and the jungle were his birthright. No creature that
went upon the ground upon four feet, or climbed among the trees, or
crawled upon its belly had any advantage over the ape-man in his native
heath. As myrrh and frankincense were the dank odors of rotting
vegetation in the nostrils of the great Tarmangani. He squared his
broad shoulders and lifting his head filled his lungs with the air that
he loved best. The heavy fragrance of tropical blooms, the commingled
odors of the myriad-scented life of the jungle went to his head with a
pleasurable intoxication far more potent than aught contained in the
oldest vintages of civilization.

He took to the trees now, not from necessity but from pure love of the
wild freedom that had been denied him so long. Though it was dark and
the forest strange yet he moved with a surety and ease that bespoke
more a strange uncanny sense than wondrous skill. He heard JA moaning
somewhere ahead and an owl hooted mournfully to the right of him--long
familiar sounds that imparted to him no sense of loneliness as they
might to you or to me, but on the contrary one of companionship for
they betokened the presence of his fellows of the jungle, and whether
friend or foe it was all the same to the ape-man.

He came at last to a little stream at a spot where the trees did not
meet above it so he was forced to descend to the ground and wade
through the water and upon the opposite shore he stopped as though
suddenly his godlike figure had been transmuted from flesh to marble.
Only his dilating nostrils bespoke his pulsing vitality. For a long
moment he stood there thus and then swiftly, but with a caution and
silence that were inherent in him he moved forward again, but now his
whole attitude bespoke a new urge.  There was a definite and masterful
purpose in every movement of those steel muscles rolling softly beneath
the smooth brown hide.  He moved now toward a certain goal that quite
evidently filled him with far greater enthusiasm than had the possible
event of his return to A-lur.

And so he came at last to the foot of a great tree and there he stopped
and looked up above him among the foliage where the dim outlines of a
roughly rectangular bulk loomed darkly. There was a choking sensation
in Tarzan's throat as he raised himself gently into the branches. It
was as though his heart were swelling either to a great happiness or a
great fear.

Before the rude shelter built among the branches he paused listening.
From within there came to his sensitive nostrils the same delicate
aroma that had arrested his eager attention at the little stream a mile
away. He crouched upon the branch close to the little door.

"Jane," he called, "heart of my heart, it is I."

The only answer from within was as the sudden indrawing of a breath
that was half gasp and half sigh, and the sound of a body falling to
the floor. Hurriedly Tarzan sought to release the thongs which held the
door but they were fastened from the inside, and at last, impatient
with further delay, he seized the frail barrier in one giant hand and
with a single effort tore it completely away. And then he entered to
find the seemingly lifeless body of his mate stretched upon the floor.

He gathered her in his arms; her heart beat; she still breathed, and
presently he realized that she had but swooned.

When Jane Clayton regained consciousness it was to find herself held
tightly in two strong arms, her head pillowed upon the broad shoulder
where so often before her fears had been soothed and her sorrows
comforted. At first she was not sure but that it was all a dream.
Timidly her hand stole to his cheek.

"John," she murmured, "tell me, is it really you?"

In reply he drew her more closely to him. "It is I," he replied. "But
there is something in my throat," he said haltingly, "that makes it
hard for me to speak."

She smiled and snuggled closer to him. "God has been good to us, Tarzan
of the Apes," she said.

For some time neither spoke. It was enough that they were reunited and
that each knew that the other was alive and safe.  But at last they
found their voices and when the sun rose they were still talking, so
much had each to tell the other; so many questions there were to be
asked and answered.

"And Jack," she asked, "where is he?"

"I do not know," replied Tarzan. "The last I heard of him he was on the
Argonne Front."

"Ah, then our happiness is not quite complete," she said, a little note
of sadness creeping into her voice.

"No," he replied, "but the same is true in countless other English
homes today, and pride is learning to take the place of happiness in
these."

She shook her head, "I want my boy," she said.

"And I too," replied Tarzan, "and we may have him yet. He was safe and
unwounded the last word I had. And now," he said, "we must plan upon
our return. Would you like to rebuild the bungalow and gather together
the remnants of our Waziri or would you rather return to London?"

"Only to find Jack," she said. "I dream always of the bungalow and
never of the city, but John, we can only dream, for Obergatz told me
that he had circled this whole country and found no place where he
might cross the morass."

"I am not Obergatz," Tarzan reminded her, smiling. "We will rest today
and tomorrow we will set out toward the north. It is a savage country,
but we have crossed it once and we can cross it again."

And so, upon the following morning, the Tarmangani and his mate went
forth upon their journey across the Valley of Jad-ben-Otho, and ahead
of them were fierce men and savage beasts, and the lofty mountains of
Pal-ul-don; and beyond the mountains the reptiles and the morass, and
beyond that the arid, thorn-covered steppe, and other savage beasts and
men and weary, hostile miles of untracked wilderness between them and
the charred ruins of their home.

Lieutenant Erich Obergatz crawled through the grass upon all fours,
leaving a trail of blood behind him after Jane's spear had sent him
crashing to the ground beneath her tree. He made no sound after the one
piercing scream that had acknowledged the severity of his wound. He was
quiet because of a great fear that had crept into his warped brain that
the devil woman would pursue and slay him. And so he crawled away like
some filthy beast of prey, seeking a thicket where he might lie down
and hide.

He thought that he was going to die, but he did not, and with the
coming of the new day he discovered that his wound was superficial. The
rough obsidian-shod spear had entered the muscles of his side beneath
his right arm inflicting a painful, but not a fatal wound. With the
realization of this fact came a renewed desire to put as much distance
as possible between himself and Jane Clayton. And so he moved on, still
going upon all fours because of a persistent hallucination that in this
way he might escape observation. Yet though he fled his mind still
revolved muddily about a central desire--while he fled from her he
still planned to pursue her, and to his lust of possession was added a
desire for revenge. She should pay for the suffering she had inflicted
upon him. She should pay for rebuffing him, but for some reason which
he did not try to explain to himself he would crawl away and hide. He
would come back though. He would come back and when he had finished
with her, he would take that smooth throat in his two hands and crush
the life from her.

He kept repeating this over and over to himself and then he fell to
laughing out loud, the cackling, hideous laughter that had terrified
Jane. Presently he realized his knees were bleeding and that they hurt
him. He looked cautiously behind. No one was in sight. He listened. He
could hear no indications of pursuit and so he rose to his feet and
continued upon his way a sorry sight--covered with filth and blood, his
beard and hair tangled and matted and filled with burrs and dried mud
and unspeakable filth. He kept no track of time. He ate fruits and
berries and tubers that he dug from the earth with his fingers. He
followed the shore of the lake and the river that he might be near
water, and when JA roared or moaned he climbed a tree and hid there,
shivering.

And so after a time he came up the southern shore of Jad-ben-lul until
a wide river stopped his progress. Across the blue water a white city
glimmered in the sun. He looked at it for a long time, blinking his
eyes like an owl. Slowly a recollection forced itself through his
tangled brain. This was A-lur, the City of Light. The association of
ideas recalled Bu-lur and the Waz-ho-don. They had called him
Jad-ben-Otho. He commenced to laugh aloud and stood up very straight
and strode back and forth along the shore. "I am Jad-ben-Otho," he
cried, "I am the Great God. In A-lur is my temple and my high priests.
What is Jad-ben-Otho doing here alone in the jungle?"

He stepped out into the water and raising his voice shrieked loudly
across toward A-lur. "I am Jad-ben-Otho!" he screamed.  "Come hither
slaves and take your god to his temple." But the distance was great and
they did not hear him and no one came, and the feeble mind was
distracted by other things--a bird flying in the air, a school of
minnows swimming around his feet. He lunged at them trying to catch
them, and falling upon his hands and knees he crawled through the water
grasping futilely at the elusive fish.

Presently it occurred to him that he was a sea lion and he forgot the
fish and lay down and tried to swim by wriggling his feet in the water
as though they were a tail. The hardships, the privations, the terrors,
and for the past few weeks the lack of proper nourishment had reduced
Erich Obergatz to little more than a gibbering idiot.

A water snake swam out upon the surface of the lake and the man pursued
it, crawling upon his hands and knees. The snake swam toward the shore
just within the mouth of the river where tall reeds grew thickly and
Obergatz followed, making grunting noises like a pig. He lost the snake
within the reeds but he came upon something else--a canoe hidden there
close to the bank. He examined it with cackling laughter. There were
two paddles within it which he took and threw out into the current of
the river. He watched them for a while and then he sat down beside the
canoe and commenced to splash his hands up and down upon the water. He
liked to hear the noise and see the little splashes of spray. He rubbed
his left forearm with his right palm and the dirt came off and left a
white spot that drew his attention. He rubbed again upon the now
thoroughly soaked blood and grime that covered his body. He was not
attempting to wash himself; he was merely amused by the strange
results. "I am turning white," he cried. His glance wandered from his
body now that the grime and blood were all removed and caught again the
white city shimmering beneath the hot sun.

"A-lur--City of Light!" he shrieked and that reminded him again of
Tu-lur and by the same process of associated ideas that had before
suggested it, he recalled that the Waz-ho-don had thought him
Jad-ben-Otho.

"I am Jad-ben-Otho!" he screamed and then his eyes fell again upon the
canoe. A new idea came and persisted. He looked down at himself,
examining his body, and seeing the filthy loin cloth, now water soaked
and more bedraggled than before, he tore it from him and flung it into
the lake. "Gods do not wear dirty rags," he said aloud. "They do not
wear anything but wreaths and garlands of flowers and I am a god--I am
Jad-ben-Otho--and I go in state to my sacred city of A-lur."

He ran his fingers through his matted hair and beard. The water had
softened the burrs but had not removed them. The man shook his head.
His hair and beard failed to harmonize with his other godly attributes.
He was commencing to think more clearly now, for the great idea had
taken hold of his scattered wits and concentrated them upon a single
purpose, but he was still a maniac. The only difference being that he
was now a maniac with a fixed intent. He went out on the shore and
gathered flowers and ferns and wove them in his beard and hair--blazing
blooms of different colors--green ferns that trailed about his ears or
rose bravely upward like the plumes in a lady's hat.

When he was satisfied that his appearance would impress the most casual
observer with his evident deity he returned to the canoe, pushed it
from shore and jumped in. The impetus carried it into the river's
current and the current bore it out upon the lake.  The naked man stood
erect in the center of the little craft, his arms folded upon his
chest. He screamed aloud his message to the city: "I am Jad-ben-Otho!
Let the high priest and the under priests attend upon me!"

As the current of the river was dissipated by the waters of the lake
the wind caught him and his craft and carried them bravely forward.
Sometimes he drifted with his back toward A-lur and sometimes with his
face toward it, and at intervals he shrieked his message and his
commands. He was still in the middle of the lake when someone
discovered him from the palace wall, and as he drew nearer, a crowd of
warriors and women and children were congregated there watching him and
along the temple walls were many priests and among them Lu-don, the
high priest. When the boat had drifted close enough for them to
distinguish the bizarre figure standing in it and for them to catch the
meaning of his words Lu-don's cunning eyes narrowed. The high priest
had learned of the escape of Tarzan and he feared that should he join
Ja-don's forces, as seemed likely, he would attract many recruits who
might still believe in him, and the Dor-ul-Otho, even if a false one,
upon the side of the enemy might easily work havoc with Lu-don's plans.

The man was drifting close in. His canoe would soon be caught in the
current that ran close to shore here and carried toward the river that
emptied the waters of Jad-ben-lul into Jad-bal-lul.  The under priests
were looking toward Lu-don for instructions.

"Fetch him hither!" he commanded. "If he is Jad-ben-Otho I shall know
him."

The priests hurried to the palace grounds and summoned warriors. "Go,
bring the stranger to Lu-don. If he is Jad-ben-Otho we shall know him."

And so Lieutenant Erich Obergatz was brought before the high priest at
A-lur. Lu-don looked closely at the naked man with the fantastic
headdress.

"Where did you come from?" he asked.

"I am Jad-ben-Otho," cried the German. "I came from heaven. Where is my
high priest?"

"I am the high priest," replied Lu-don.

Obergatz clapped his hands. "Have my feet bathed and food brought to
me," he commanded.

Lu-don's eyes narrowed to mere slits of crafty cunning. He bowed low
until his forehead touched the feet of the stranger. Before the eyes of
many priests, and warriors from the palace he did it.

"Ho, slaves," he cried, rising; "fetch water and food for the Great
God," and thus the high priest acknowledged before his people the
godhood of Lieutenant Erich Obergatz, nor was it long before the story
ran like wildfire through the palace and out into the city and beyond
that to the lesser villages all the way from A-lur to Tu-lur.

The real god had come--Jad-ben-Otho himself, and he had espoused the
cause of Lu-don, the high priest. Mo-sar lost no time in placing
himself at the disposal of Lu-don, nor did he mention aught about his
claims to the throne. It was Mo-sar's opinion that he might consider
himself fortunate were he allowed to remain in peaceful occupation of
his chieftainship at Tu-lur, nor was Mo-sar wrong in his deductions.

But Lu-don could still use him and so he let him live and sent word to
him to come to A-lur with all his warriors, for it was rumored that
Ja-don was raising a great army in the north and might soon march upon
the City of Light.

Obergatz thoroughly enjoyed being a god. Plenty of food and peace of
mind and rest partially brought back to him the reason that had been so
rapidly slipping from him; but in one respect he was madder than ever,
since now no power on earth would ever be able to convince him that he
was not a god. Slaves were put at his disposal and these he ordered
about in godly fashion. The same portion of his naturally cruel mind
met upon common ground the mind of Lu-don, so that the two seemed
always in accord. The high priest saw in the stranger a mighty force
wherewith to hold forever his power over all Pal-ul-don and thus the
future of Obergatz was assured so long as he cared to play god to
Lu-don's high priest.

A throne was erected in the main temple court before the eastern altar
where Jad-ben-Otho might sit in person and behold the sacrifices that
were offered up to him there each day at sunset.  So much did the
cruel, half-crazed mind enjoy these spectacles that at times he even
insisted upon wielding the sacrificial knife himself and upon such
occasions the priests and the people fell upon their faces in awe of
the dread deity.

If Obergatz taught them not to love their god more he taught them to
fear him as they never had before, so that the name of Jad-ben-Otho was
whispered in the city and little children were frightened into
obedience by the mere mention of it. Lu-don, through his priests and
slaves, circulated the information that Jad-ben-Otho had commanded all
his faithful followers to flock to the standard of the high priest at
A-lur and that all others were cursed, especially Ja-don and the base
impostor who had posed as the Dor-ul-Otho. The curse was to take the
form of early death following terrible suffering, and Lu-don caused it
to be published abroad that the name of any warrior who complained of a
pain should be brought to him, for such might be deemed to be under
suspicion, since the first effects of the curse would result in slight
pains attacking the unholy. He counseled those who felt pains to look
carefully to their loyalty. The result was remarkable and
immediate--half a nation without a pain, and recruits pouring into
A-lur to offer their services to Lu-don while secretly hoping that the
little pains they had felt in arm or leg or belly would not recur in
aggravated form.



22

A Journey on a Gryf

Tarzan and Jane skirted the shore of Jad-bal-lul and crossed the river
at the head of the lake. They moved in leisurely fashion with an eye to
comfort and safety, for the ape-man, now that he had found his mate,
was determined to court no chance that might again separate them, or
delay or prevent their escape from Pal-ul-don. How they were to recross
the morass was a matter of little concern to him as yet--it would be
time enough to consider that matter when it became of more immediate
moment.  Their hours were filled with the happiness and content of
reunion after long separation; they had much to talk of, for each had
passed through many trials and vicissitudes and strange adventures, and
no important hour might go unaccounted for since last they met.

It was Tarzan's intention to choose a way above A-lur and the scattered
Ho-don villages below it, passing about midway between them and the
mountains, thus avoiding, in so far as possible, both the Ho-don and
Waz-don, for in this area lay the neutral territory that was
uninhabited by either. Thus he would travel northwest until opposite
the Kor-ul-JA where he planned to stop to pay his respects to Om-at and
give the gund word of Pan-at-lee, and a plan Tarzan had for insuring
her safe return to her people. It was upon the third day of their
journey and they had almost reached the river that passes through A-lur
when Jane suddenly clutched Tarzan's arm and pointed ahead toward the
edge of a forest that they were approaching. Beneath the shadows of the
trees loomed a great bulk that the ape-man instantly recognized.

"What is it?" whispered Jane.

"A GRYF," replied the ape-man, "and we have met him in the worst place
that we could possibly have found. There is not a large tree within a
quarter of a mile, other than those among which he stands. Come, we
shall have to go back, Jane; I cannot risk it with you along. The best
we can do is to pray that he does not discover us."

"And if he does?"

"Then I shall have to risk it."

"Risk what?"

"The chance that I can subdue him as I subdued one of his fellows,"
replied Tarzan. "I told you--you recall?"

"Yes, but I did not picture so huge a creature. Why, John, he is as big
as a battleship."

The ape-man laughed. "Not quite, though I'll admit he looks quite as
formidable as one when he charges."

They were moving away slowly so as not to attract the attention of the
beast.

"I believe we're going to make it," whispered the woman, her voice
tense with suppressed excitement. A low rumble rolled like distant
thunder from the wood. Tarzan shook his head.

"'The big show is about to commence in the main tent,'" he quoted,
grinning. He caught the woman suddenly to his breast and kissed her.
"One can never tell, Jane," he said. "We'll do our best--that is all we
can do. Give me your spear, and--don't run.  The only hope we have lies
in that little brain more than in us.  If I can control it--well, let
us see."

The beast had emerged from the forest and was looking about through his
weak eyes, evidently in search of them. Tarzan raised his voice in the
weird notes of the Tor-o-don's cry, "Whee-oo! Whee-oo! Whee-oo!" For a
moment the great beast stood motionless, his attention riveted by the
call. The ape-man advanced straight toward him, Jane Clayton at his
elbow.  "Whee-oo!" he cried again peremptorily. A low rumble rolled
from the GRYF's cavernous chest in answer to the call, and the beast
moved slowly toward them.

"Fine!" exclaimed Tarzan. "The odds are in our favor now. You can keep
your nerve?--but I do not need to ask."

"I know no fear when I am with Tarzan of the Apes," she replied softly,
and he felt the pressure of her soft fingers on his arm.

And thus the two approached the giant monster of a forgotten epoch
until they stood close in the shadow of a mighty shoulder. "Whee-oo!"
shouted Tarzan and struck the hideous snout with the shaft of the
spear. The vicious side snap that did not reach its mark--that
evidently was not intended to reach its mark--was the hoped-for answer.

"Come," said Tarzan, and taking Jane by the hand he led her around
behind the monster and up the broad tail to the great, horned back.
"Now will we ride in the state that our forebears knew, before which
the pomp of modern kings pales into cheap and tawdry insignificance.
How would you like to canter through Hyde Park on a mount like this?"

"I am afraid the Bobbies would be shocked by our riding habits, John,"
she cried, laughingly.

Tarzan guided the GRYF in the direction that they wished to go. Steep
embankments and rivers proved no slightest obstacle to the ponderous
creature.

"A prehistoric tank, this," Jane assured him, and laughing and talking
they continued on their way. Once they came unexpectedly upon a dozen
Ho-don warriors as the GRYF emerged suddenly into a small clearing. The
fellows were lying about in the shade of a single tree that grew alone.
When they saw the beast they leaped to their feet in consternation and
at their shouts the GRYF issued his hideous, challenging bellow and
charged them. The warriors fled in all directions while Tarzan
belabored the beast across the snout with his spear in an effort to
control him, and at last he succeeded, just as the GRYF was almost upon
one poor devil that it seemed to have singled out for its special prey.
With an angry grunt the GRYF stopped and the man, with a single
backward glance that showed a face white with terror, disappeared in
the jungle he had been seeking to reach.

The ape-man was elated. He had doubted that he could control the beast
should it take it into its head to charge a victim and had intended
abandoning it before they reached the Kor-ul-JA. Now he altered his
plans--they would ride to the very village of Om-at upon the GRYF, and
the Kor-ul-JA would have food for conversation for many generations to
come. Nor was it the theatric instinct of the ape-man alone that gave
favor to this plan. The element of Jane's safety entered into the
matter for he knew that she would be safe from man and beast alike so
long as she rode upon the back of Pal-ul-don's most formidable creature.

As they proceeded slowly in the direction of the Kor-ul-JA, for the
natural gait of the GRYF is far from rapid, a handful of terrified
warriors came panting into A-lur, spreading a weird story of the
Dor-ul-Otho, only none dared call him the Dor-ul-Otho aloud. Instead
they spoke of him as Tarzan-jad-guru and they told of meeting him
mounted upon a mighty GRYF beside the beautiful stranger woman whom
Ko-tan would have made queen of Pal-ul-don.  This story was brought to
Lu-don who caused the warriors to be hailed to his presence, when he
questioned them closely until finally he was convinced that they spoke
the truth and when they had told him the direction in which the two
were traveling, Lu-don guessed that they were on their way to Ja-lur to
join Ja-don, a contingency that he felt must be prevented at any cost.
As was his wont in the stress of emergency, he called Pan-sat into
consultation and for long the two sat in close conference.  When they
arose a plan had been developed. Pan-sat went immediately to his own
quarters where he removed the headdress and trappings of a priest to
don in their stead the harness and weapons of a warrior. Then he
returned to Lu-don.

"Good!" cried the latter, when he saw him. "Not even your
fellow-priests or the slaves that wait upon you daily would know you
now. Lose no time, Pan-sat, for all depends upon the speed with which
you strike and--remember! Kill the man if you can; but in any event
bring the woman to me here, alive. You understand?"

"Yes, master," replied the priest, and so it was that a lone warrior
set out from A-lur and made his way northwest in the direction of
Ja-lur.

The gorge next above Kor-ul-JA is uninhabited and here the wily Ja-don
had chosen to mobilize his army for its descent upon A-lur. Two
considerations influenced him--one being the fact that could he keep
his plans a secret from the enemy he would have the advantage of
delivering a surprise attack upon the forces of Lu-don from a direction
that they would not expect attack, and in the meantime he would be able
to keep his men from the gossip of the cities where strange tales were
already circulating relative to the coming of Jad-ben-Otho in person to
aid the high priest in his war against Ja-don. It took stout hearts and
loyal ones to ignore the implied threats of divine vengeance that these
tales suggested. Already there had been desertions and the cause of
Ja-don seemed tottering to destruction.

Such was the state of affairs when a sentry posted on the knoll in the
mouth of the gorge sent word that he had observed in the valley below
what appeared at a distance to be nothing less than two people mounted
upon the back of a GRYF. He said that he had caught glimpses of them,
as they passed open spaces, and they seemed to be traveling up the
river in the direction of the Kor-ul-JA.

At first Ja-don was inclined to doubt the veracity of his informant;
but, like all good generals, he could not permit even palpably false
information to go uninvestigated and so he determined to visit the
knoll himself and learn precisely what it was that the sentry had
observed through the distorting spectacles of fear. He had scarce taken
his place beside the man ere the fellow touched his arm and pointed.
"They are closer now," he whispered, "you can see them plainly." And
sure enough, not a quarter of a mile away Ja-don saw that which in his
long experience in Pal-ul-don he had never before seen--two humans
riding upon the broad back of a GRYF.

At first he could scarce credit even this testimony of his own eyes,
but soon he realized that the creatures below could be naught else than
they appeared, and then he recognized the man and rose to his feet with
a loud cry.

"It is he!" he shouted to those about him. "It is the Dor-ul-Otho
himself."

The GRYF and his riders heard the shout though not the words. The
former bellowed terrifically and started in the direction of the knoll,
and Ja-don, followed by a few of his more intrepid warriors, ran to
meet him. Tarzan, loath to enter an unnecessary quarrel, tried to turn
the animal, but as the beast was far from tractable it always took a
few minutes to force the will of its master upon it; and so the two
parties were quite close before the ape-man succeeded in stopping the
mad charge of his furious mount.

Ja-don and his warriors, however, had come to the realization that this
bellowing creature was bearing down upon them with evil intent and they
had assumed the better part of valor and taken to trees, accordingly.
It was beneath these trees that Tarzan finally stopped the GRYF. Ja-don
called down to him.

"We are friends," he cried. "I am Ja-don, Chief of Ja-lur. I and my
warriors lay our foreheads upon the feet of Dor-ul-Otho and pray that
he will aid us in our righteous fight with Lu-don, the high priest."

"You have not defeated him yet?" asked Tarzan. "Why I thought you would
be king of Pal-ul-don long before this."

"No," replied Ja-don. "The people fear the high priest and now that he
has in the temple one whom he claims to be Jad-ben-Otho many of my
warriors are afraid. If they but knew that the Dor-ul-Otho had returned
and that he had blessed the cause of Ja-don I am sure that victory
would be ours."

Tarzan thought for a long minute and then he spoke. "Ja-don," he said,
"was one of the few who believed in me and who wished to accord me fair
treatment. I have a debt to pay to Ja-don and an account to settle with
Lu-don, not alone on my own behalf, but principally upon that of my
mate. I will go with you Ja-don to mete to Lu-don the punishment he
deserves. Tell me, chief, how may the Dor-ul-Otho best serve his
father's people?"

"By coming with me to Ja-lur and the villages between," replied Ja-don
quickly, "that the people may see that it is indeed the Dor-ul-Otho and
that he smiles upon the cause of Ja-don."

"You think that they will believe in me more now than before?" asked
the ape-man.

"Who will dare doubt that he who rides upon the great GRYF is less than
a god?" returned the old chief.

"And if I go with you to the battle at A-lur," asked Tarzan, "can you
assure the safety of my mate while I am gone from her?"

"She shall remain in Ja-lur with the Princess O-lo-a and my own women,"
replied Ja-don. "There she will be safe for there I shall leave trusted
warriors to protect them. Say that you will come, O Dor-ul-Otho, and my
cup of happiness will be full, for even now Ta-den, my son, marches
toward A-lur with a force from the northwest and if we can attack, with
the Dor-ul-Otho at our head, from the northeast our arms should be
victorious."

"It shall be as you wish, Ja-don," replied the ape-man; "but first you
must have meat fetched for my GRYF."

"There are many carcasses in the camp above," replied Ja-don, "for my
men have little else to do than hunt."

"Good," exclaimed Tarzan. "Have them brought at once."

And when the meat was brought and laid at a distance the ape-man
slipped from the back of his fierce charger and fed him with his own
hand. "See that there is always plenty of flesh for him," he said to
Ja-don, for he guessed that his mastery might be short-lived should the
vicious beast become over-hungry.

It was morning before they could leave for Ja-lur, but Tarzan found the
GRYF lying where he had left him the night before beside the carcasses
of two antelope and a lion; but now there was nothing but the GRYF.

"The paleontologists say that he was herbivorous," said Tarzan as he
and Jane approached the beast.

The journey to Ja-lur was made through the scattered villages where
Ja-don hoped to arouse a keener enthusiasm for his cause. A party of
warriors preceded Tarzan that the people might properly be prepared,
not only for the sight of the GRYF but to receive the Dor-ul-Otho as
became his high station. The results were all that Ja-don could have
hoped and in no village through which they passed was there one who
doubted the deity of the ape-man.

As they approached Ja-lur a strange warrior joined them, one whom none
of Ja-don's following knew. He said he came from one of the villages to
the south and that he had been treated unfairly by one of Lu-don's
chiefs. For this reason he had deserted the cause of the high priest
and come north in the hope of finding a home in Ja-lur. As every
addition to his forces was welcome to the old chief he permitted the
stranger to accompany them, and so he came into Ja-lur with them.

There arose now the question as to what was to be done with the GRYF
while they remained in the city. It was with difficulty that Tarzan had
prevented the savage beast from attacking all who came near it when
they had first entered the camp of Ja-don in the uninhabited gorge next
to the Kor-ul-JA, but during the march to Ja-lur the creature had
seemed to become accustomed to the presence of the Ho-don. The latter,
however, gave him no cause for annoyance since they kept as far from
him as possible and when he passed through the streets of the city he
was viewed from the safety of lofty windows and roofs. However
tractable he appeared to have become there would have been no
enthusiastic seconding of a suggestion to turn him loose within the
city. It was finally suggested that he be turned into a walled
enclosure within the palace grounds and this was done, Tarzan driving
him in after Jane had dismounted. More meat was thrown to him and he
was left to his own devices, the awe-struck inhabitants of the palace
not even venturing to climb upon the walls to look at him.

Ja-don led Tarzan and Jane to the quarters of the Princess O-lo-a who,
the moment that she beheld the ape-man, threw herself to the ground and
touched her forehead to his feet. Pan-at-lee was there with her and she
too seemed happy to see Tarzan-jad-guru again. When they found that
Jane was his mate they looked with almost equal awe upon her, since
even the most skeptical of the warriors of Ja-don were now convinced
that they were entertaining a god and a goddess within the city of
Ja-lur, and that with the assistance of the power of these two, the
cause of Ja-don would soon be victorious and the old Lion-man set upon
the throne of Pal-ul-don.

From O-lo-a Tarzan learned that Ta-den had returned and that they were
to be united in marriage with the weird rites of their religion and in
accordance with the custom of their people as soon as Ta-den came home
from the battle that was to be fought at A-lur.

The recruits were now gathering at the city and it was decided that the
next day Ja-don and Tarzan would return to the main body in the hidden
camp and immediately under cover of night the attack should be made in
force upon Lu-don's forces at A-lur. Word of this was sent to Ta-den
where he awaited with his warriors upon the north side of Jad-ben-lul,
only a few miles from A-lur.

In the carrying out of these plans it was necessary to leave Jane
behind in Ja-don's palace at Ja-lur, but O-lo-a and her women were with
her and there were many warriors to guard them, so Tarzan bid his mate
good-bye with no feelings of apprehension as to her safety, and again
seated upon the GRYF made his way out of the city with Ja-don and his
warriors.

At the mouth of the gorge the ape-man abandoned his huge mount since it
had served its purpose and could be of no further value to him in their
attack upon A-lur, which was to be made just before dawn the following
day when, as he could not have been seen by the enemy, the effect of
his entry to the city upon the GRYF would have been totally lost. A
couple of sharp blows with the spear sent the big animal rumbling and
growling in the direction of the Kor-ul-GRYF nor was the ape-man sorry
to see it depart since he had never known at what instant its short
temper and insatiable appetite for flesh might turn it upon some of his
companions.

Immediately upon their arrival at the gorge the march on A-lur was
commenced.



23

Taken Alive

As night fell a warrior from the palace of Ja-lur slipped into the
temple grounds. He made his way to where the lesser priests were
quartered. His presence aroused no suspicion as it was not unusual for
warriors to have business within the temple. He came at last to a
chamber where several priests were congregated after the evening meal.
The rites and ceremonies of the sacrifice had been concluded and there
was nothing more of a religious nature to make call upon their time
until the rites at sunrise.

Now the warrior knew, as in fact nearly all Pal-ul-don knew, that there
was no strong bond between the temple and the palace at Ja-lur and that
Ja-don only suffered the presence of the priests and permitted their
cruel and abhorrent acts because of the fact that these things had been
the custom of the Ho-don of Pal-ul-don for countless ages, and rash
indeed must have been the man who would have attempted to interfere
with the priests or their ceremonies. That Ja-don never entered the
temple was well known, and that his high priest never entered the
palace, but the people came to the temple with their votive offerings
and the sacrifices were made night and morning as in every other temple
in Pal-ul-don.

The warriors knew these things, knew them better perhaps than a simple
warrior should have known them. And so it was here in the temple that
he looked for the aid that he sought in the carrying out of whatever
design he had.

As he entered the apartment where the priests were he greeted them
after the manner which was customary in Pal-ul-don, but at the same
time he made a sign with his finger that might have attracted little
attention or scarcely been noticed at all by one who knew not its
meaning. That there were those within the room who noticed it and
interpreted it was quickly apparent, through the fact that two of the
priests rose and came close to him as he stood just within the doorway
and each of them, as he came, returned the signal that the warrior had
made.

The three talked for but a moment and then the warrior turned and left
the apartment. A little later one of the priests who had talked with
him left also and shortly after that the other.

In the corridor they found the warrior waiting, and led him to a little
chamber which opened upon a smaller corridor just beyond where it
joined the larger. Here the three remained in whispered conversation
for some little time and then the warrior returned to the palace and
the two priests to their quarters.

The apartments of the women of the palace at Ja-lur are all upon the
same side of a long, straight corridor. Each has a single door leading
into the corridor and at the opposite end several windows overlooking a
garden. It was in one of these rooms that Jane slept alone. At each end
of the corridor was a sentinel, the main body of the guard being
stationed in a room near the outer entrance to the women's quarters.

The palace slept for they kept early hours there where Ja-don ruled.
The pal-e-don-so of the great chieftain of the north knew no such wild
orgies as had resounded through the palace of the king at A-lur. Ja-lur
was a quiet city by comparison with the capital, yet there was always a
guard kept at every entrance to the chambers of Ja-don and his
immediate family as well as at the gate leading into the temple and
that which opened upon the city.

These guards, however, were small, consisting usually of not more than
five or six warriors, one of whom remained awake while the others
slept. Such were the conditions then when two warriors presented
themselves, one at either end of the corridor, to the sentries who
watched over the safety of Jane Clayton and the Princess O-lo-a, and
each of the newcomers repeated to the sentinels the stereotyped words
which announced that they were relieved and these others sent to watch
in their stead. Never is a warrior loath to be relieved of sentry duty.
Where, under different circumstances he might ask numerous questions he
is now too well satisfied to escape the monotonies of that universally
hated duty. And so these two men accepted their relief without question
and hastened away to their pallets.

And then a third warrior entered the corridor and all of the newcomers
came together before the door of the ape-man's slumbering mate. And one
was the strange warrior who had met Ja-don and Tarzan outside the city
of Ja-lur as they had approached it the previous day; and he was the
same warrior who had entered the temple a short hour before, but the
faces of his fellows were unfamiliar, even to one another, since it is
seldom that a priest removes his hideous headdress in the presence even
of his associates.

Silently they lifted the hangings that hid the interior of the room
from the view of those who passed through the corridor, and stealthily
slunk within. Upon a pile of furs in a far corner lay the sleeping form
of Lady Greystoke. The bare feet of the intruders gave forth no sound
as they crossed the stone floor toward her. A ray of moonlight entering
through a window near her couch shone full upon her, revealing the
beautiful contours of an arm and shoulder in cameo-distinctness against
the dark furry pelt beneath which she slept, and the perfect profile
that was turned toward the skulking three.

But neither the beauty nor the helplessness of the sleeper aroused such
sentiments of passion or pity as might stir in the breasts of normal
men. To the three priests she was but a lump of clay, nor could they
conceive aught of that passion which had aroused men to intrigue and to
murder for possession of this beautiful American girl, and which even
now was influencing the destiny of undiscovered Pal-ul-don.

Upon the floor of the chamber were numerous pelts and as the leader of
the trio came close to the sleeping woman he stooped and gathered up
one of the smaller of these. Standing close to her head he held the rug
outspread above her face. "Now," he whispered and simultaneously he
threw the rug over the woman's head and his two fellows leaped upon
her, seizing her arms and pinioning her body while their leader stifled
her cries with the furry pelt. Quickly and silently they bound her
wrists and gagged her and during the brief time that their work
required there was no sound that might have been heard by occupants of
the adjoining apartments.

Jerking her roughly to her feet they forced her toward a window but she
refused to walk, throwing herself instead upon the floor. They were
very angry and would have resorted to cruelties to compel her obedience
but dared not, since the wrath of Lu-don might fall heavily upon
whoever mutilated his fair prize.

And so they were forced to lift and carry her bodily. Nor was the task
any sinecure since the captive kicked and struggled as best she might,
making their labor as arduous as possible. But finally they succeeded
in getting her through the window and into the garden beyond where one
of the two priests from the Ja-lur temple directed their steps toward a
small barred gateway in the south wall of the enclosure.

Immediately beyond this a flight of stone stairs led downward toward
the river and at the foot of the stairs were moored several canoes.
Pan-sat had indeed been fortunate in enlisting aid from those who knew
the temple and the palace so well, or otherwise he might never have
escaped from Ja-lur with his captive. Placing the woman in the bottom
of a light canoe Pan-sat entered it and took up the paddle. His
companions unfastened the moorings and shoved the little craft out into
the current of the stream. Their traitorous work completed they turned
and retraced their steps toward the temple, while Pan-sat, paddling
strongly with the current, moved rapidly down the river that would
carry him to the Jad-ben-lul and A-lur.

The moon had set and the eastern horizon still gave no hint of
approaching day as a long file of warriors wound stealthily through the
darkness into the city of A-lur. Their plans were all laid and there
seemed no likelihood of their miscarriage. A messenger had been
dispatched to Ta-den whose forces lay northwest of the city. Tarzan,
with a small contingent, was to enter the temple through the secret
passageway, the location of which he alone knew, while Ja-don, with the
greater proportion of the warriors, was to attack the palace gates.

The ape-man, leading his little band, moved stealthily through the
winding alleys of A-lur, arriving undetected at the building which hid
the entrance to the secret passageway. This spot being best protected
by the fact that its existence was unknown to others than the priests,
was unguarded. To facilitate the passage of his little company through
the narrow winding, uneven tunnel, Tarzan lighted a torch which had
been brought for the purpose and preceding his warriors led the way
toward the temple.

That he could accomplish much once he reached the inner chambers of the
temple with his little band of picked warriors the ape-man was
confident since an attack at this point would bring confusion and
consternation to the easily overpowered priests, and permit Tarzan to
attack the palace forces in the rear at the same time that Ja-don
engaged them at the palace gates, while Ta-den and his forces swarmed
the northern walls. Great value had been placed by Ja-don on the moral
effect of the Dor-ul-Otho's mysterious appearance in the heart of the
temple and he had urged Tarzan to take every advantage of the old
chieftain's belief that many of Lu-don's warriors still wavered in
their allegiance between the high priest and the Dor-ul-Otho, being
held to the former more by the fear which he engendered in the breasts
of all his followers than by any love or loyalty they might feel toward
him.

There is a Pal-ul-donian proverb setting forth a truth similar to that
contained in the old Scotch adage that "The best laid schemes o' mice
and men gang aft a-gley." Freely translated it might read, "He who
follows the right trail sometimes reaches the wrong destination," and
such apparently was the fate that lay in the footsteps of the great
chieftain of the north and his godlike ally.

Tarzan, more familiar with the windings of the corridors than his
fellows and having the advantage of the full light of the torch, which
at best was but a dim and flickering affair, was some distance ahead of
the others, and in his keen anxiety to close with the enemy he gave too
little thought to those who were to support him. Nor is this strange,
since from childhood the ape-man had been accustomed to fight the
battles of life single-handed so that it had become habitual for him to
depend solely upon his own cunning and prowess.

And so it was that he came into the upper corridor from which opened
the chambers of Lu-don and the lesser priests far in advance of his
warriors, and as he turned into this corridor with its dim cressets
flickering somberly, he saw another enter it from a corridor before
him--a warrior half carrying, half dragging the figure of a woman.
Instantly Tarzan recognized the gagged and fettered captive whom he had
thought safe in the palace of Ja-don at Ja-lur.

The warrior with the woman had seen Tarzan at the same instant that the
latter had discovered him. He heard the low beastlike growl that broke
from the ape-man's lips as he sprang forward to wrest his mate from her
captor and wreak upon him the vengeance that was in the Tarmangani's
savage heart. Across the corridor from Pan-sat was the entrance to a
smaller chamber. Into this he leaped carrying the woman with him.

Close behind came Tarzan of the Apes. He had cast aside his torch and
drawn the long knife that had been his father's. With the impetuosity
of a charging bull he rushed into the chamber in pursuit of Pan-sat to
find himself, when the hangings dropped behind him, in utter darkness.
Almost immediately there was a crash of stone on stone before him
followed a moment later by a similar crash behind. No other evidence
was necessary to announce to the ape-man that he was again a prisoner
in Lu-don's temple.

He stood perfectly still where he had halted at the first sound of the
descending stone door. Not again would he easily be precipitated to the
GRYF pit, or some similar danger, as had occurred when Lu-don had
trapped him in the Temple of the Gryf.  As he stood there his eyes
slowly grew accustomed to the darkness and he became aware that a dim
light was entering the chamber through some opening, though it was
several minutes before he discovered its source. In the roof of the
chamber he finally discerned a small aperture, possibly three feet in
diameter and it was through this that what was really only a lesser
darkness rather than a light was penetrating its Stygian blackness of
the chamber in which he was imprisoned.

Since the doors had fallen he had heard no sound though his keen ears
were constantly strained in an effort to discover a clue to the
direction taken by the abductor of his mate. Presently he could discern
the outlines of his prison cell. It was a small room, not over fifteen
feet across. On hands and knees, with the utmost caution, he examined
the entire area of the floor. In the exact center, directly beneath the
opening in the roof, was a trap, but otherwise the floor was solid.
With this knowledge it was only necessary to avoid this spot in so far
as the floor was concerned. The walls next received his attention.
There were only two openings. One the doorway through which he had
entered, and upon the opposite side that through which the warrior had
borne Jane Clayton. These were both closed by the slabs of stone which
the fleeing warrior had released as he departed.

Lu-don, the high priest, licked his thin lips and rubbed his bony white
hands together in gratification as Pan-sat bore Jane Clayton into his
presence and laid her on the floor of the chamber before him.

"Good, Pan-sat!" he exclaimed. "You shall be well rewarded for this
service. Now, if we but had the false Dor-ul-Otho in our power all
Pal-ul-don would be at our feet."

"Master, I have him!" cried Pan-sat.

"What!" exclaimed Lu-don, "you have Tarzan-jad-guru? You have slain him
perhaps. Tell me, my wonderful Pan-sat, tell me quickly. My breast is
bursting with a desire to know."

"I have taken him alive, Lu-don, my master," replied Pan-sat. "He is in
the little chamber that the ancients built to trap those who were too
powerful to take alive in personal encounter."

"You have done well, Pan-sat, I--"

A frightened priest burst into the apartment. "Quick, master, quick,"
he cried, "the corridors are filled with the warriors of Ja-don."

"You are mad," cried the high priest. "My warriors hold the palace and
the temple."

"I speak the truth, master," replied the priest, "there are warriors in
the corridor approaching this very chamber, and they come from the
direction of the secret passage which leads hither from the city."

"It may be even as he says," exclaimed Pan-sat. "It was from that
direction that Tarzan-jad-guru was coming when I discovered and trapped
him. He was leading his warriors to the very holy of holies."

Lu-don ran quickly to the doorway and looked out into the corridor. At
a glance he saw that the fears of the frightened priest were well
founded. A dozen warriors were moving along the corridor toward him but
they seemed confused and far from sure of themselves. The high priest
guessed that deprived of the leadership of Tarzan they were little
better than lost in the unknown mazes of the subterranean precincts of
the temple.

Stepping back into the apartment he seized a leathern thong that
depended from the ceiling. He pulled upon it sharply and through the
temple boomed the deep tones of a metal gong. Five times the clanging
notes rang through the corridors, then he turned toward the two
priests. "Bring the woman and follow me," he directed.

Crossing the chamber he passed through a small doorway, the others
lifting Jane Clayton from the floor and following him.  Through a
narrow corridor and up a flight of steps they went, turning to right
and left and doubling back through a maze of winding passageways which
terminated in a spiral staircase that gave forth at the surface of the
ground within the largest of the inner altar courts close beside the
eastern altar.

From all directions now, in the corridors below and the grounds above,
came the sound of hurrying footsteps. The five strokes of the great
gong had summoned the faithful to the defense of Lu-don in his private
chambers. The priests who knew the way led the less familiar warriors
to the spot and presently those who had accompanied Tarzan found
themselves not only leaderless but facing a vastly superior force. They
were brave men but under the circumstances they were helpless and so
they fell back the way they had come, and when they reached the narrow
confines of the smaller passageway their safety was assured since only
one foeman could attack them at a time. But their plans were frustrated
and possibly also their entire cause lost, so heavily had Ja-don banked
upon the success of their venture.

With the clanging of the temple gong Ja-don assumed that Tarzan and his
party had struck their initial blow and so he launched his attack upon
the palace gate. To the ears of Lu-don in the inner temple court came
the savage war cries that announced the beginning of the battle.
Leaving Pan-sat and the other priest to guard the woman he hastened
toward the palace personally to direct his force and as he passed
through the temple grounds he dispatched a messenger to learn the
outcome of the fight in the corridors below, and other messengers to
spread the news among his followers that the false Dor-ul-Otho was a
prisoner in the temple.

As the din of battle rose above A-lur, Lieutenant Erich Obergatz turned
upon his bed of soft hides and sat up. He rubbed his eyes and looked
about him. It was still dark without.

"I am Jad-ben-Otho," he cried, "who dares disturb my slumber?"

A slave squatting upon the floor at the foot of his couch shuddered and
touched her forehead to the floor. "It must be that the enemy have
come, O Jad-ben-Otho." She spoke soothingly for she had reason to know
the terrors of the mad frenzy into which trivial things sometimes threw
the Great God.

A priest burst suddenly through the hangings of the doorway and falling
upon his hands and knees rubbed his forehead against the stone
flagging. "O Jad-ben-Otho," he cried, "the warriors of Ja-don have
attacked the palace and the temple. Even now they are fighting in the
corridors near the quarters of Lu-don, and the high priest begs that
you come to the palace and encourage your faithful warriors by your
presence."

Obergatz sprang to his feet. "I am Jad-ben-Otho," he screamed. "With
lightning I will blast the blasphemers who dare attack the holy city of
A-lur."

For a moment he rushed aimlessly and madly about the room, while the
priest and the slave remained upon hands and knees with their foreheads
against the floor.

"Come," cried Obergatz, planting a vicious kick in the side of the
slave girl. "Come! Would you wait here all day while the forces of
darkness overwhelm the City of Light?"

Thoroughly frightened as were all those who were forced to serve the
Great God, the two arose and followed Obergatz towards the palace.

Above the shouting of the warriors rose constantly the cries of the
temple priests: "Jad-ben-Otho is here and the false Dor-ul-Otho is a
prisoner in the temple." The persistent cries reached even to the ears
of the enemy as it was intended that they should.



24

The Messenger of Death

The sun rose to see the forces of Ja-don still held at the palace gate.
The old warrior had seized the tall structure that stood just beyond
the palace and at the summit of this he kept a warrior stationed to
look toward the northern wall of the palace where Ta-den was to make
his attack; but as the minutes wore into hours no sign of the other
force appeared, and now in the full light of the new sun upon the roof
of one of the palace buildings appeared Lu-don, the high priest,
Mo-sar, the pretender, and the strange, naked figure of a man, into
whose long hair and beard were woven fresh ferns and flowers. Behind
them were banked a score of lesser priests who chanted in unison: "This
is Jad-ben-Otho. Lay down your arms and surrender." This they repeated
again and again, alternating it with the cry: "The false Dor-ul-Otho is
a prisoner."

In one of those lulls which are common in battles between forces armed
with weapons that require great physical effort in their use, a voice
suddenly arose from among the followers of Ja-don: "Show us the
Dor-ul-Otho. We do not believe you!"

"Wait," cried Lu-don. "If I do not produce him before the sun has moved
his own width, the gates of the palace shall be opened to you and my
warriors will lay down their arms."

He turned to one of his priests and issued brief instructions.

The ape-man paced the confines of his narrow cell. Bitterly he
reproached himself for the stupidity which had led him into this trap,
and yet was it stupidity? What else might he have done other than rush
to the succor of his mate? He wondered how they had stolen her from
Ja-lur, and then suddenly there flashed to his mind the features of the
warrior whom he had just seen with her. They were strangely familiar.
He racked his brain to recall where he had seen the man before and then
it came to him. He was the strange warrior who had joined Ja-don's
forces outside of Ja-lur the day that Tarzan had ridden upon the great
GRYF from the uninhabited gorge next to the Kor-ul-JA down to the
capital city of the chieftain of the north. But who could the man be?
Tarzan knew that never before that other day had he seen him.

Presently he heard the clanging of a gong from the corridor without and
very faintly the rush of feet, and shouts. He guessed that his warriors
had been discovered and a fight was in progress. He fretted and chafed
at the chance that had denied him participation in it.

Again and again he tried the doors of his prison and the trap in the
center of the floor, but none would give to his utmost endeavors. He
strained his eyes toward the aperture above but he could see nothing,
and then he continued his futile pacing to and fro like a caged lion
behind its bars.

The minutes dragged slowly into hours. Faintly sounds came to him as of
shouting men at a great distance. The battle was in progress. He
wondered if Ja-don would be victorious and should he be, would his
friends ever discover him in this hidden chamber in the bowels of the
hill? He doubted it.

And now as he looked again toward the aperture in the roof there
appeared to be something depending through its center. He came closer
and strained his eyes to see. Yes, there was something there. It
appeared to be a rope. Tarzan wondered if it had been there all the
time. It must have, he reasoned, since he had heard no sound from above
and it was so dark within the chamber that he might easily have
overlooked it.

He raised his hand toward it. The end of it was just within his reach.
He bore his weight upon it to see if it would hold him. Then he
released it and backed away, still watching it, as you have seen an
animal do after investigating some unfamiliar object, one of the little
traits that differentiated Tarzan from other men, accentuating his
similarity to the savage beasts of his native jungle. Again and again
he touched and tested the braided leather rope, and always he listened
for any warning sound from above.

He was very careful not to step upon the trap at any time and when
finally he bore all his weight upon the rope and took his feet from the
floor he spread them wide apart so that if he fell he would fall
astride the trap. The rope held him. There was no sound from above, nor
any from the trap below.

Slowly and cautiously he drew himself upward, hand over hand.  Nearer
and nearer the roof he came. In a moment his eyes would be above the
level of the floor above. Already his extended arms projected into the
upper chamber and then something closed suddenly upon both his
forearms, pinioning them tightly and leaving him hanging in mid-air
unable to advance or retreat.

Immediately a light appeared in the room above him and presently he saw
the hideous mask of a priest peering down upon him. In the priest's
hands were leathern thongs and these he tied about Tarzan's wrists and
forearms until they were completely bound together from his elbows
almost to his fingers. Behind this priest Tarzan presently saw others
and soon several lay hold of him and pulled him up through the hole.

Almost instantly his eyes were above the level of the floor he
understood how they had trapped him. Two nooses had lain encircling the
aperture into the cell below. A priest had waited at the end of each of
these ropes and at opposite sides of the chamber. When he had climbed
to a sufficient height upon the rope that had dangled into his prison
below and his arms were well within the encircling snares the two
priests had pulled quickly upon their ropes and he had been made an
easy captive without any opportunity of defending himself or inflicting
injury upon his captors.

And now they bound his legs from his ankles to his knees and picking
him up carried him from the chamber. No word did they speak to him as
they bore him upward to the temple yard.

The din of battle had risen again as Ja-don had urged his forces to
renewed efforts. Ta-den had not arrived and the forces of the old
chieftain were revealing in their lessened efforts their increasing
demoralization, and then it was that the priests carried
Tarzan-jad-guru to the roof of the palace and exhibited him in the
sight of the warriors of both factions.

"Here is the false Dor-ul-Otho," screamed Lu-don.

Obergatz, his shattered mentality having never grasped fully the
meaning of much that was going on about him, cast a casual glance at
the bound and helpless prisoner, and as his eyes fell upon the noble
features of the ape-man, they went wide in astonishment and fright, and
his pasty countenance turned a sickly blue. Once before had he seen
Tarzan of the Apes, but many times had he dreamed that he had seen him
and always was the giant ape-man avenging the wrongs that had been
committed upon him and his by the ruthless hands of the three German
officers who had led their native troops in the ravishing of Tarzan's
peaceful home.  Hauptmann Fritz Schneider had paid the penalty of his
needless cruelties; Unter-lieutenant von Goss, too, had paid; and now
Obergatz, the last of the three, stood face to face with the Nemesis
that had trailed him through his dreams for long, weary months. That he
was bound and helpless lessened not the German's terror--he seemed not
to realize that the man could not harm him.  He but stood cringing and
jibbering and Lu-don saw and was filled with apprehension that others
might see and seeing realize that this bewhiskered idiot was no
god--that of the two Tarzan-jad-guru was the more godly figure. Already
the high priest noted that some of the palace warriors standing near
were whispering together and pointing. He stepped closer to Obergatz.
"You are Jad-ben-Otho," he whispered, "denounce him!"

The German shook himself. His mind cleared of all but his great terror
and the words of the high priest gave him the clue to safety.

"I am Jad-ben-Otho!" he screamed.

Tarzan looked him straight in the eye. "You are Lieutenant Obergatz of
the German Army," he said in excellent German. "You are the last of the
three I have sought so long and in your putrid heart you know that God
has not brought us together at last for nothing."

The mind of Lieutenant Obergatz was functioning clearly and rapidly at
last. He too saw the questioning looks upon the faces of some of those
around them. He saw the opposing warriors of both cities standing by
the gate inactive, every eye turned upon him, and the trussed figure of
the ape-man. He realized that indecision now meant ruin, and ruin,
death. He raised his voice in the sharp barking tones of a Prussian
officer, so unlike his former maniacal screaming as to quickly arouse
the attention of every ear and to cause an expression of puzzlement to
cross the crafty face of Lu-don.

"I am Jad-ben-Otho," snapped Obergatz. "This creature is no son of
mine. As a lesson to all blasphemers he shall die upon the altar at the
hand of the god he has profaned. Take him from my sight, and when the
sun stands at zenith let the faithful congregate in the temple court
and witness the wrath of this divine hand," and he held aloft his right
palm.

Those who had brought Tarzan took him away then as Obergatz had
directed, and the German turned once more to the warriors by the gate.
"Throw down your arms, warriors of Ja-don," he cried, "lest I call down
my lightnings to blast you where you stand. Those who do as I bid shall
be forgiven. Come! Throw down your arms."

The warriors of Ja-don moved uneasily, casting looks of appeal at their
leader and of apprehension toward the figures upon the palace roof.
Ja-don sprang forward among his men. "Let the cowards and knaves throw
down their arms and enter the palace," he cried, "but never will Ja-don
and the warriors of Ja-lur touch their foreheads to the feet of Lu-don
and his false god. Make your decision now," he cried to his followers.

A few threw down their arms and with sheepish looks passed through the
gateway into the palace, and with the example of these to bolster their
courage others joined in the desertion from the old chieftain of the
north, but staunch and true around him stood the majority of his
warriors and when the last weakling had left their ranks Ja-don voiced
the savage cry with which he led his followers to the attack, and once
again the battle raged about the palace gate.

At times Ja-don's forces pushed the defenders far into the palace
ground and then the wave of combat would recede and pass out into the
city again. And still Ta-den and the reinforcements did not come. It
was drawing close to noon. Lu-don had mustered every available man that
was not actually needed for the defense of the gate within the temple,
and these he sent, under the leadership of Pan-sat, out into the city
through the secret passageway and there they fell upon Ja-don's forces
from the rear while those at the gate hammered them in front.

Attacked on two sides by a vastly superior force the result was
inevitable and finally the last remnant of Ja-don's little army
capitulated and the old chief was taken a prisoner before Lu-don. "Take
him to the temple court," cried the high priest. "He shall witness the
death of his accomplice and perhaps Jad-ben-Otho shall pass a similar
sentence upon him as well."

The inner temple court was packed with humanity. At either end of the
western altar stood Tarzan and his mate, bound and helpless. The sounds
of battle had ceased and presently the ape-man saw Ja-don being led
into the inner court, his wrists bound tightly together before him.
Tarzan turned his eyes toward Jane and nodded in the direction of
Ja-don. "This looks like the end," he said quietly. "He was our last
and only hope."

"We have at least found each other, John," she replied, "and our last
days have been spent together. My only prayer now is that if they take
you they do not leave me."

Tarzan made no reply for in his heart was the same bitter thought that
her own contained--not the fear that they would kill him but the fear
that they would not kill her. The ape-man strained at his bonds but
they were too many and too strong. A priest near him saw and with a
jeering laugh struck the defenseless ape-man in the face.

"The brute!" cried Jane Clayton.

Tarzan smiled. "I have been struck thus before, Jane," he said, "and
always has the striker died."

"You still have hope?" she asked.

"I am still alive," he said as though that were sufficient answer. She
was a woman and she did not have the courage of this man who knew no
fear. In her heart of hearts she knew that he would die upon the altar
at high noon for he had told her, after he had been brought to the
inner court, of the sentence of death that Obergatz had pronounced upon
him, and she knew too that Tarzan knew that he would die, but that he
was too courageous to admit it even to himself.

As she looked upon him standing there so straight and wonderful and
brave among his savage captors her heart cried out against the cruelty
of the fate that had overtaken him. It seemed a gross and hideous wrong
that that wonderful creature, now so quick with exuberant life and
strength and purpose should be presently naught but a bleeding lump of
clay--and all so uselessly and wantonly. Gladly would she have offered
her life for his but she knew that it was a waste of words since their
captors would work upon them whatever it was their will to do--for him,
death; for her--she shuddered at the thought.

And now came Lu-don and the naked Obergatz, and the high priest led the
German to his place behind the altar, himself standing upon the other's
left. Lu-don whispered a word to Obergatz, at the same time nodding in
the direction of Ja-don. The Hun cast a scowling look upon the old
warrior.

"And after the false god," he cried, "the false prophet," and he
pointed an accusing finger at Ja-don. Then his eyes wandered to the
form of Jane Clayton.

"And the woman, too?" asked Lu-don.

"The case of the woman I will attend to later," replied Obergatz. "I
will talk with her tonight after she has had a chance to meditate upon
the consequences of arousing the wrath of Jad-ben-Otho."

He cast his eyes upward at the sun. "The time approaches," he said to
Lu-don. "Prepare the sacrifice."

Lu-don nodded to the priests who were gathered about Tarzan. They
seized the ape-man and lifted him bodily to the altar where they laid
him upon his back with his head at the south end of the monolith, but a
few feet from where Jane Clayton stood.  Impulsively and before they
could restrain her the woman rushed forward and bending quickly kissed
her mate upon the forehead.  "Good-bye, John," she whispered.

"Good-bye," he answered, smiling.

The priests seized her and dragged her away. Lu-don handed the
sacrificial knife to Obergatz. "I am the Great God," cried the German,
"thus falleth the divine wrath upon all my enemies!" He looked up at
the sun and then raised the knife high above his head.

"Thus die the blasphemers of God!" he screamed, and at the same instant
a sharp staccato note rang out above the silent, spell-bound multitude.
There was a screaming whistle in the air and Jad-ben-Otho crumpled
forward across the body of his intended victim. Again the same alarming
noise and Lu-don fell, a third and Mo-sar crumpled to the ground. And
now the warriors and the people, locating the direction of this new and
unknown sound turned toward the western end of the court.

Upon the summit of the temple wall they saw two figures--a Ho-don
warrior and beside him an almost naked creature of the race of
Tarzan-jad-guru, across his shoulders and about his hips were strange
broad belts studded with beautiful cylinders that glinted in the
mid-day sun, and in his hands a shining thing of wood and metal from
the end of which rose a thin wreath of blue-gray smoke.

And then the voice of the Ho-don warrior rang clear upon the ears of
the silent throng. "Thus speaks the true Jad-ben-Otho," he cried,
"through this his Messenger of Death. Cut the bonds of the prisoners.
Cut the bonds of the Dor-ul-Otho and of Ja-don, King of Pal-ul-don, and
of the woman who is the mate of the son of god."

Pan-sat, filled with the frenzy of fanaticism saw the power and the
glory of the regime he had served crumpled and gone. To one and only
one did he attribute the blame for the disaster that had but just
overwhelmed him. It was the creature who lay upon the sacrificial altar
who had brought Lu-don to his death and toppled the dreams of power
that day by day had been growing in the brain of the under priest.

The sacrificial knife lay upon the altar where it had fallen from the
dead fingers of Obergatz. Pan-sat crept closer and then with a sudden
lunge he reached forth to seize the handle of the blade, and even as
his clutching fingers were poised above it, the strange thing in the
hands of the strange creature upon the temple wall cried out its
crashing word of doom and Pan-sat the under priest, screaming, fell
back upon the dead body of his master.

"Seize all the priests," cried Ta-den to the warriors, "and let none
hesitate lest Jad-ben-Otho's messenger send forth still other bolts of
lightning."

The warriors and the people had now witnessed such an exhibition of
divine power as might have convinced an even less superstitious and
more enlightened people, and since many of them had but lately wavered
between the Jad-ben-Otho of Lu-don and the Dor-ul-Otho of Ja-don it was
not difficult for them to swing quickly back to the latter, especially
in view of the unanswerable argument in the hands of him whom Ta-den
had described as the Messenger of the Great God.

And so the warriors sprang forward now with alacrity and surrounded the
priests, and when they looked again at the western wall of the temple
court they saw pouring over it a great force of warriors. And the thing
that startled and appalled them was the fact that many of these were
black and hairy Waz-don.

At their head came the stranger with the shiny weapon and on his right
was Ta-den, the Ho-don, and on his left Om-at, the black gund of
Kor-ul-JA.

A warrior near the altar had seized the sacrificial knife and cut
Tarzan's bonds and also those of Ja-don and Jane Clayton, and now the
three stood together beside the altar and as the newcomers from the
western end of the temple court pushed their way toward them the eyes
of the woman went wide in mingled astonishment, incredulity, and hope.
And the stranger, slinging his weapon across his back by a leather
strap, rushed forward and took her in his arms.

"Jack!" she cried, sobbing on his shoulder. "Jack, my son!"

And Tarzan of the Apes came then and put his arms around them both, and
the King of Pal-ul-don and the warriors and the people kneeled in the
temple court and placed their foreheads to the ground before the altar
where the three stood.



25

Home

Within an hour of the fall of Lu-don and Mo-sar, the chiefs and
principal warriors of Pal-ul-don gathered in the great throneroom of
the palace at A-lur upon the steps of the lofty pyramid and placing
Ja-don at the apex proclaimed him king. Upon one side of the old
chieftain stood Tarzan of the Apes, and upon the other Korak, the
Killer, worthy son of the mighty ape-man.

And when the brief ceremony was over and the warriors with upraised
clubs had sworn fealty to their new ruler, Ja-don dispatched a trusted
company to fetch O-lo-a and Pan-at-lee and the women of his own
household from Ja-lur.

And then the warriors discussed the future of Pal-ul-don and the
question arose as to the administration of the temples and the fate of
the priests, who practically without exception had been disloyal to the
government of the king, seeking always only their own power and comfort
and aggrandizement. And then it was that Ja-don turned to Tarzan. "Let
the Dor-ul-Otho transmit to his people the wishes of his father," he
said.

"Your problem is a simple one," said the ape-man, "if you but wish to
do that which shall be pleasing in the eyes of God. Your priests, to
increase their power, have taught you that Jad-ben-Otho is a cruel god,
that his eyes love to dwell upon blood and upon suffering. But the
falsity of their teachings has been demonstrated to you today in the
utter defeat of the priesthood.

"Take then the temples from the men and give them instead to the women
that they may be administered in kindness and charity and love. Wash
the blood from your eastern altar and drain forever the water from the
western.

"Once I gave Lu-don the opportunity to do these things but he ignored
my commands, and again is the corridor of sacrifice filled with its
victims. Liberate these from every temple in Pal-ul-don. Bring
offerings of such gifts as your people like and place them upon the
altars of your god. And there he will bless them and the priestesses of
Jad-ben-Otho can distribute them among those who need them most."

As he ceased speaking a murmur of evident approval ran through the
throng. Long had they been weary of the avarice and cruelty of the
priests and now that authority had come from a high source with a
feasible plan for ridding themselves of the old religious order without
necessitating any change in the faith of the people they welcomed it.

"And the priests," cried one. "We shall put them to death upon their
own altars if it pleases the Dor-ul-Otho to give the word."

"No," cried Tarzan. "Let no more blood be spilled. Give them their
freedom and the right to take up such occupations as they choose."

That night a great feast was spread in the pal-e-don-so and for the
first time in the history of ancient Pal-ul-don black warriors sat in
peace and friendship with white. And a pact was sealed between Ja-don
and Om-at that would ever make his tribe and the Ho-don allies and
friends.

It was here that Tarzan learned the cause of Ta-den's failure to attack
at the stipulated time. A messenger had come from Ja-don carrying
instructions to delay the attack until noon, nor had they discovered
until almost too late that the messenger was a disguised priest of
Lu-don. And they had put him to death and scaled the walls and come to
the inner temple court with not a moment to spare.

The following day O-lo-a and Pan-at-lee and the women of Ja-don's
family arrived at the palace at A-lur and in the great throneroom
Ta-den and O-lo-a were wed, and Om-at and Pan-at-lee.

For a week Tarzan and Jane and Korak remained the guests of Ja-don, as
did Om-at and his black warriors. And then the ape-man announced that
he would depart from Pal-ul-don. Hazy in the minds of their hosts was
the location of heaven and equally so the means by which the gods
traveled between their celestial homes and the haunts of men and so no
questionings arose when it was found that the Dor-ul-Otho with his mate
and son would travel overland across the mountains and out of
Pal-ul-don toward the north.

They went by way of the Kor-ul-JA accompanied by the warriors of that
tribe and a great contingent of Ho-don warriors under Ta-den. The king
and many warriors and a multitude of people accompanied them beyond the
limits of A-lur and after they had bid them good-bye and Tarzan had
invoked the blessings of God upon them the three Europeans saw their
simple, loyal friends prostrate in the dust behind them until the
cavalcade had wound out of the city and disappeared among the trees of
the nearby forest.

They rested for a day among the Kor-ul-JA while Jane investigated the
ancient caves of these strange people and then they moved on, avoiding
the rugged shoulder of Pastar-ul-ved and winding down the opposite
slope toward the great morass. They moved in comfort and in safety,
surrounded by their escort of Ho-don and Waz-don.

In the minds of many there was doubtless a question as to how the three
would cross the great morass but least of all was Tarzan worried by the
problem. In the course of his life he had been confronted by many
obstacles only to learn that he who will may always pass. In his mind
lurked an easy solution of the passage but it was one which depended
wholly upon chance.

It was the morning of the last day that, as they were breaking camp to
take up the march, a deep bellow thundered from a nearby grove. The
ape-man smiled. The chance had come. Fittingly then would the
Dor-ul-Otho and his mate and their son depart from unmapped Pal-ul-don.

He still carried the spear that Jane had made, which he had prized so
highly because it was her handiwork that he had caused a search to be
made for it through the temple in A-lur after his release, and it had
been found and brought to him. He had told her laughingly that it
should have the place of honor above their hearth as the ancient
flintlock of her Puritan grandsire had held a similar place of honor
above the fireplace of Professor Porter, her father.

At the sound of the bellowing the Ho-don warriors, some of whom had
accompanied Tarzan from Ja-don's camp to Ja-lur, looked questioningly
at the ape-man while Om-at's Waz-don looked for trees, since the GRYF
was the one creature of Pal-ul-don which might not be safely
encountered even by a great multitude of warriors. Its tough, armored
hide was impregnable to their knife thrusts while their thrown clubs
rattled from it as futilely as if hurled at the rocky shoulder of
Pastar-ul-ved.

"Wait," said the ape-man, and with his spear in hand he advanced toward
the GRYF, voicing the weird cry of the Tor-o-don. The bellowing ceased
and turned to low rumblings and presently the huge beast appeared. What
followed was but a repetition of the ape-man's previous experience with
these huge and ferocious creatures.

And so it was that Jane and Korak and Tarzan rode through the morass
that hems Pal-ul-don, upon the back of a prehistoric triceratops while
the lesser reptiles of the swamp fled hissing in terror. Upon the
opposite shore they turned and called back their farewells to Ta-den
and Om-at and the brave warriors they had learned to admire and
respect. And then Tarzan urged their titanic mount onward toward the
north, abandoning him only when he was assured that the Waz-don and the
Ho-don had had time to reach a point of comparative safety among the
craggy ravines of the foothills.

Turning the beast's head again toward Pal-ul-don the three dismounted
and a sharp blow upon the thick hide sent the creature lumbering
majestically back in the direction of its native haunts. For a time
they stood looking back upon the land they had just quit--the land of
Tor-o-don and GRYF; of JA and JATO; of Waz-don and Ho-don; a primitive
land of terror and sudden death and peace and beauty; a land that they
all had learned to love.

And then they turned once more toward the north and with light hearts
and brave hearts took up their long journey toward the land that is
best of all--home.



Glossary

From conversations with Lord Greystoke and from his notes, there have
been gleaned a number of interesting items relative to the language and
customs of the inhabitants of Pal-ul-don that are not brought out in
the story. For the benefit of those who may care to delve into the
derivation of the proper names used in the text, and thus obtain some
slight insight into the language of the race, there is appended an
incomplete glossary taken from some of Lord Greystoke's notes.

A point of particular interest hinges upon the fact that the names of
all male hairless pithecanthropi begin with a consonant, have an even
number of syllables, and end with a consonant, while the names of the
females of the same species begin with a vowel, have an odd number of
syllables, and end with a vowel. On the contrary, the names of the male
hairy black pithecanthropi while having an even number of syllables
begin with a vowel and end with a consonant; while the females of this
species have an odd number of syllables in their names which begin
always with a consonant and end with a vowel.


 A.                      Light.
 ab.                     Boy.
 Ab-on.                  Acting gund of Kor-ul-JA.
 Ad.                     Three.
 Adad.                   Six.
 Adadad.                 Nine.
 Adaden.                 Seven.
 Aden.                   Four.
 Adenaden.               Eight.
 Adenen.                 Five.
 A-lur.                  City of light.
 An.                     Spear.
 An-un.                  Father of Pan-at-lee.
 As.                     The sun.
 At.                     Tail.

 Bal.                    Gold or golden.
 Bar.                    Battle.
 Ben.                    Great.
 Bu.                     Moon.
 Bu-lot (moon face).     Son of chief Mo-sar.
 Bu-lur (moon city).     The city of the Waz-ho-don.

 Dak.                    Fat.
 Dak-at (fat tail).      Chief of a Ho-don village.
 Dak-lot.                One of Ko-tan's palace warriors.
 Dan.                    Rock.
 Den.                    Tree.
 Don.                    Man.
 Dor.                    Son.
 Dor-ul-Otho
 (son of god).           Tarzan.

 E.                      Where.
 Ed.                     Seventy.
 El.                     Grace or graceful.
 En.                     One.
 Enen.                   Two.
 Es.                     Rough.
 Es-sat (rough skin).    Chief of Om-at's tribe of hairy blacks.
 Et.                     Eighty.

 Fur.                    Thirty.

 Ged.                    Forty.
 Go.                     Clear.
 Gryf.                   "Triceratops. A genus of huge
                         herbivorous dinosaurs of the group
                         Ceratopsia. The skull had two large
                         horns above the eyes, a median
                         horn on the nose, a horny  beak, and a
                         great bony hood or transverse crest over
                         the neck. Their toes, five in front and
                         three behind, were provided with hoofs,
                         and the tail was large and strong."
                         Webster's Dict.  The GRYF of Pal-ul-don
                         is similar except that it is
                         omnivorous, has strong, powerfully
                         armed jaws and talons instead of hoofs.
                         Coloration: face yellow with blue bands
                         encircling the eyes; hood red on top,
                         yellow underneath; belly yellow; body a
                         dirty slate blue; legs same. Bony
                         protuberances yellow except along the
                         spine--these are red. Tail conforms with
                         body and belly. Horns, ivory.
 Gund.                   Chief.
 Guru.                   Terrible.

 Het.                    Fifty.
 Ho.                     White.
 Ho-don.                 The hairless white men of Pal-ul-don.

 Id.                     Silver.
 Id-an.                  One of Pan-at-lee's two brothers.
 In.                     Dark.
 In-sad.                 Kor-ul-JA warrior accompanying Tarzan, Om-at,
                         and Ta-den in search of Pan-at-lee.
 In-tan.                 Kor-ul-lul left to guard Tarzan

 Ja.                     Lion.
 Jad.                    The
 Jad-bal-lul.            The golden lake.
 Jad-ben-lul.            The big lake.
 Jad-ben-Otho.           The Great God.
 Jad-guru-don.           The terrible man.
 Jad-in-lul.             The dark lake.
 Ja-don (the lion-man).  Chief of a Ho-don village and father of Ta-den.
 Jad Pele ul
 Jad-ben-Otho.           The valley of the Great God.
 Ja-lur (lion city).     Ja-don's capital.
 Jar.                    Strange.
 Jar-don.                Name given Korak by Om-at.
 Jato.                   Saber-tooth hybrid.

 Ko.                     Mighty.
 Kor.                    Gorge.
 Kor-ul-GRYF.            Gorge of the GRYF.
 Kor-ul-JA.              Name of Es-sat's gorge and tribe.
 Kor-ul-lul.             Name of another Waz-don gorge and tribe.
 Ko-tan.                 King of the Ho-don.

 Lav.                    Run or running.
 Lee.                    Doe.
 Lo.                     Star.
 Lot.                    Face.
 Lu.                     Fierce.
 Lu-don (fierce man).    High priest of A-lur.
 Lul.                    Water.
 Lur.                    City.

 Ma.                     Child.
 Mo.                     Short.
 Mo-sar (short nose).    Chief and pretender.
 Mu.                     Strong.

 No.                     Brook.

 O.                      Like or similar.
 Od.                     Ninety.
 O-dan.                  Kor-ul-JA warrior accompanying Tarzan, Om-at,
                         and Ta-den in search of Pan-at-lee.
 Og.                     Sixty.
 O-lo-a
 (like-star-light).      Ko-tan's daughter
 Om.                     Long.
 Om-at (long tail).      A black.
 On.                     Ten.
 Otho.                   God.

 Pal.                    Place; land; country.
 Pal-e-don-so
 (place where men eat).  Banquet hall.
 Pal-ul-don
 (land of man).          Name of the country.
 Pal-ul-JA.              Place of lions.
 Pan.                    Soft.
 Pan-at-lee.             Om-at's sweetheart.
 Pan-sat (soft skin).    A priest.
 Pastar.                 Father.
 Pastar-ul-ved.          Father of Mountains.
 Pele.                   Valley.

 Ro.                     Flower.

 Sad.                    Forest.
 San.                    One hundred
 Sar.                    Nose.
 Sat.                    Skin.
 So.                     Eat.
 Sod.                    Eaten.
 Sog.                    Eating.
 Son.                    Ate.

 Ta.                     Tall.
 Ta-den (tall tree).     A white.
 Tan.                    Warrior.
 Tarzan-jad-guru.        Tarzan the Terrible.
 To.                     Purple.
 Ton.                    Twenty.
 Tor.                    Beast.
 Tor-o-don.              Beastlike man.
 Tu.                     Bright.
 Tu-lur (bright city).   Mo-sar's city.

 Ul.                     Of.
 Un.                     Eye.
 Ut.                     Corn.

 Ved.                    Mountain

 Waz.                    Black.
 Waz-don.                The hairy black men of Pal-ul-don.
 Waz-ho-don
 (black white men).      A mixed race

 Xot.                    One thousand.

 Yo.                     Friend.

 Za.                     Girl.










End of Project Gutenberg's Tarzan the Terrible, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN THE TERRIBLE ***

***** This file should be named 2020.txt or 2020.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/2/2020/

Produced by Judy Boss.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tarzan of the Apes, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tarzan of the Apes

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Release Date: June 23, 2008 [EBook #78]
Last updated: May 5, 2012

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN OF THE APES ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.










Tarzan of the Apes


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs




         CONTENTS

      I  Out to Sea
     II  The Savage Home
    III  Life and Death
     IV  The Apes
      V  The White Ape
     VI  Jungle Battles
    VII  The Light of Knowledge
   VIII  The Tree-top Hunter
     IX  Man and Man
      X  The Fear-Phantom
     XI  "King of the Apes"
    XII  Man's Reason
   XIII  His Own Kind
    XIV  At the Mercy of the Jungle
     XV  The Forest God
    XVI  "Most Remarkable"
   XVII  Burials
  XVIII  The Jungle Toll
    XIX  The Call of the Primitive
     XX  Heredity
    XXI  The Village of Torture
   XXII  The Search Party
  XXIII  Brother Men
   XXIV  Lost Treasure
    XXV  The Outpost of the World
   XXVI  The Height of Civilization
  XXVII  The Giant Again
 XXVIII  Conclusion




Chapter I

Out to Sea


I had this story from one who had no business to tell it to me, or to
any other.  I may credit the seductive influence of an old vintage upon
the narrator for the beginning of it, and my own skeptical incredulity
during the days that followed for the balance of the strange tale.

When my convivial host discovered that he had told me so much, and that
I was prone to doubtfulness, his foolish pride assumed the task the old
vintage had commenced, and so he unearthed written evidence in the form
of musty manuscript, and dry official records of the British Colonial
Office to support many of the salient features of his remarkable
narrative.

I do not say the story is true, for I did not witness the happenings
which it portrays, but the fact that in the telling of it to you I have
taken fictitious names for the principal characters quite sufficiently
evidences the sincerity of my own belief that it MAY be true.

The yellow, mildewed pages of the diary of a man long dead, and the
records of the Colonial Office dovetail perfectly with the narrative of
my convivial host, and so I give you the story as I painstakingly
pieced it out from these several various agencies.

If you do not find it credible you will at least be as one with me in
acknowledging that it is unique, remarkable, and interesting.

From the records of the Colonial Office and from the dead man's diary
we learn that a certain young English nobleman, whom we shall call John
Clayton, Lord Greystoke, was commissioned to make a peculiarly delicate
investigation of conditions in a British West Coast African Colony from
whose simple native inhabitants another European power was known to be
recruiting soldiers for its native army, which it used solely for the
forcible collection of rubber and ivory from the savage tribes along
the Congo and the Aruwimi.  The natives of the British Colony
complained that many of their young men were enticed away through the
medium of fair and glowing promises, but that few if any ever returned
to their families.

The Englishmen in Africa went even further, saying that these poor
blacks were held in virtual slavery, since after their terms of
enlistment expired their ignorance was imposed upon by their white
officers, and they were told that they had yet several years to serve.

And so the Colonial Office appointed John Clayton to a new post in
British West Africa, but his confidential instructions centered on a
thorough investigation of the unfair treatment of black British
subjects by the officers of a friendly European power.  Why he was
sent, is, however, of little moment to this story, for he never made an
investigation, nor, in fact, did he ever reach his destination.

Clayton was the type of Englishman that one likes best to associate
with the noblest monuments of historic achievement upon a thousand
victorious battlefields--a strong, virile man--mentally, morally, and
physically.

In stature he was above the average height; his eyes were gray, his
features regular and strong; his carriage that of perfect, robust
health influenced by his years of army training.

Political ambition had caused him to seek transference from the army to
the Colonial Office and so we find him, still young, entrusted with a
delicate and important commission in the service of the Queen.

When he received this appointment he was both elated and appalled.  The
preferment seemed to him in the nature of a well-merited reward for
painstaking and intelligent service, and as a stepping stone to posts
of greater importance and responsibility; but, on the other hand, he
had been married to the Hon. Alice Rutherford for scarce a three
months, and it was the thought of taking this fair young girl into the
dangers and isolation of tropical Africa that appalled him.

For her sake he would have refused the appointment, but she would not
have it so.  Instead she insisted that he accept, and, indeed, take her
with him.

There were mothers and brothers and sisters, and aunts and cousins to
express various opinions on the subject, but as to what they severally
advised history is silent.

We know only that on a bright May morning in 1888, John, Lord
Greystoke, and Lady Alice sailed from Dover on their way to Africa.

A month later they arrived at Freetown where they chartered a small
sailing vessel, the Fuwalda, which was to bear them to their final
destination.

And here John, Lord Greystoke, and Lady Alice, his wife, vanished from
the eyes and from the knowledge of men.

Two months after they weighed anchor and cleared from the port of
Freetown a half dozen British war vessels were scouring the south
Atlantic for trace of them or their little vessel, and it was almost
immediately that the wreckage was found upon the shores of St. Helena
which convinced the world that the Fuwalda had gone down with all on
board, and hence the search was stopped ere it had scarce begun; though
hope lingered in longing hearts for many years.

The Fuwalda, a barkentine of about one hundred tons, was a vessel of
the type often seen in coastwise trade in the far southern Atlantic,
their crews composed of the offscourings of the sea--unhanged murderers
and cutthroats of every race and every nation.

The Fuwalda was no exception to the rule.  Her officers were swarthy
bullies, hating and hated by their crew.  The captain, while a
competent seaman, was a brute in his treatment of his men.  He knew, or
at least he used, but two arguments in his dealings with them--a
belaying pin and a revolver--nor is it likely that the motley
aggregation he signed would have understood aught else.

So it was that from the second day out from Freetown John Clayton and
his young wife witnessed scenes upon the deck of the Fuwalda such as
they had believed were never enacted outside the covers of printed
stories of the sea.

It was on the morning of the second day that the first link was forged
in what was destined to form a chain of circumstances ending in a life
for one then unborn such as has never been paralleled in the history of
man.

Two sailors were washing down the decks of the Fuwalda, the first mate
was on duty, and the captain had stopped to speak with John Clayton and
Lady Alice.

The men were working backwards toward the little party who were facing
away from the sailors.  Closer and closer they came, until one of them
was directly behind the captain.  In another moment he would have
passed by and this strange narrative would never have been recorded.

But just that instant the officer turned to leave Lord and Lady
Greystoke, and, as he did so, tripped against the sailor and sprawled
headlong upon the deck, overturning the water-pail so that he was
drenched in its dirty contents.

For an instant the scene was ludicrous; but only for an instant.  With
a volley of awful oaths, his face suffused with the scarlet of
mortification and rage, the captain regained his feet, and with a
terrific blow felled the sailor to the deck.

The man was small and rather old, so that the brutality of the act was
thus accentuated.  The other seaman, however, was neither old nor
small--a huge bear of a man, with fierce black mustachios, and a great
bull neck set between massive shoulders.

As he saw his mate go down he crouched, and, with a low snarl, sprang
upon the captain crushing him to his knees with a single mighty blow.

From scarlet the officer's face went white, for this was mutiny; and
mutiny he had met and subdued before in his brutal career.  Without
waiting to rise he whipped a revolver from his pocket, firing point
blank at the great mountain of muscle towering before him; but, quick
as he was, John Clayton was almost as quick, so that the bullet which
was intended for the sailor's heart lodged in the sailor's leg instead,
for Lord Greystoke had struck down the captain's arm as he had seen the
weapon flash in the sun.

Words passed between Clayton and the captain, the former making it
plain that he was disgusted with the brutality displayed toward the
crew, nor would he countenance anything further of the kind while he
and Lady Greystoke remained passengers.

The captain was on the point of making an angry reply, but, thinking
better of it, turned on his heel and black and scowling, strode aft.

He did not care to antagonize an English official, for the Queen's
mighty arm wielded a punitive instrument which he could appreciate, and
which he feared--England's far-reaching navy.

The two sailors picked themselves up, the older man assisting his
wounded comrade to rise.  The big fellow, who was known among his mates
as Black Michael, tried his leg gingerly, and, finding that it bore his
weight, turned to Clayton with a word of gruff thanks.

Though the fellow's tone was surly, his words were evidently well
meant.  Ere he had scarce finished his little speech he had turned and
was limping off toward the forecastle with the very apparent intention
of forestalling any further conversation.

They did not see him again for several days, nor did the captain accord
them more than the surliest of grunts when he was forced to speak to
them.

They took their meals in his cabin, as they had before the unfortunate
occurrence; but the captain was careful to see that his duties never
permitted him to eat at the same time.

The other officers were coarse, illiterate fellows, but little above
the villainous crew they bullied, and were only too glad to avoid
social intercourse with the polished English noble and his lady, so
that the Claytons were left very much to themselves.

This in itself accorded perfectly with their desires, but it also
rather isolated them from the life of the little ship so that they were
unable to keep in touch with the daily happenings which were to
culminate so soon in bloody tragedy.

There was in the whole atmosphere of the craft that undefinable
something which presages disaster.  Outwardly, to the knowledge of the
Claytons, all went on as before upon the little vessel; but that there
was an undertow leading them toward some unknown danger both felt,
though they did not speak of it to each other.

On the second day after the wounding of Black Michael, Clayton came on
deck just in time to see the limp body of one of the crew being carried
below by four of his fellows while the first mate, a heavy belaying pin
in his hand, stood glowering at the little party of sullen sailors.

Clayton asked no questions--he did not need to--and the following day,
as the great lines of a British battleship grew out of the distant
horizon, he half determined to demand that he and Lady Alice be put
aboard her, for his fears were steadily increasing that nothing but
harm could result from remaining on the lowering, sullen Fuwalda.

Toward noon they were within speaking distance of the British vessel,
but when Clayton had nearly decided to ask the captain to put them
aboard her, the obvious ridiculousness of such a request became
suddenly apparent.  What reason could he give the officer commanding
her majesty's ship for desiring to go back in the direction from which
he had just come!

What if he told them that two insubordinate seamen had been roughly
handled by their officers?  They would but laugh in their sleeves and
attribute his reason for wishing to leave the ship to but one
thing--cowardice.

John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, did not ask to be transferred to the
British man-of-war.  Late in the afternoon he saw her upper works fade
below the far horizon, but not before he learned that which confirmed
his greatest fears, and caused him to curse the false pride which had
restrained him from seeking safety for his young wife a few short hours
before, when safety was within reach--a safety which was now gone
forever.

It was mid-afternoon that brought the little old sailor, who had been
felled by the captain a few days before, to where Clayton and his wife
stood by the ship's side watching the ever diminishing outlines of the
great battleship.  The old fellow was polishing brasses, and as he came
edging along until close to Clayton he said, in an undertone:

"'Ell's to pay, sir, on this 'ere craft, an' mark my word for it, sir.
'Ell's to pay."

"What do you mean, my good fellow?" asked Clayton.

"Wy, hasn't ye seen wats goin' on?  Hasn't ye 'eard that devil's spawn
of a capting an' is mates knockin' the bloomin' lights outen 'arf the
crew?

"Two busted 'eads yeste'day, an' three to-day.  Black Michael's as good
as new agin an' 'e's not the bully to stand fer it, not 'e; an' mark my
word for it, sir."

"You mean, my man, that the crew contemplates mutiny?" asked Clayton.

"Mutiny!" exclaimed the old fellow.  "Mutiny!  They means murder, sir,
an' mark my word for it, sir."

"When?"

"Hit's comin', sir; hit's comin' but I'm not a-sayin' wen, an' I've
said too damned much now, but ye was a good sort t'other day an' I
thought it no more'n right to warn ye.  But keep a still tongue in yer
'ead an' when ye 'ear shootin' git below an' stay there.

"That's all, only keep a still tongue in yer 'ead, or they'll put a
pill between yer ribs, an' mark my word for it, sir," and the old
fellow went on with his polishing, which carried him away from where
the Claytons were standing.

"Deuced cheerful outlook, Alice," said Clayton.

"You should warn the captain at once, John.  Possibly the trouble may
yet be averted," she said.

"I suppose I should, but yet from purely selfish motives I am almost
prompted to 'keep a still tongue in my 'ead.' Whatever they do now they
will spare us in recognition of my stand for this fellow Black Michael,
but should they find that I had betrayed them there would be no mercy
shown us, Alice."

"You have but one duty, John, and that lies in the interest of vested
authority.  If you do not warn the captain you are as much a party to
whatever follows as though you had helped to plot and carry it out with
your own head and hands."

"You do not understand, dear," replied Clayton.  "It is of you I am
thinking--there lies my first duty.  The captain has brought this
condition upon himself, so why then should I risk subjecting my wife to
unthinkable horrors in a probably futile attempt to save him from his
own brutal folly?  You have no conception, dear, of what would follow
were this pack of cutthroats to gain control of the Fuwalda."

"Duty is duty, John, and no amount of sophistries may change it.  I
would be a poor wife for an English lord were I to be responsible for
his shirking a plain duty.  I realize the danger which must follow, but
I can face it with you."

"Have it as you will then, Alice," he answered, smiling.  "Maybe we are
borrowing trouble.  While I do not like the looks of things on board
this ship, they may not be so bad after all, for it is possible that
the 'Ancient Mariner' was but voicing the desires of his wicked old
heart rather than speaking of real facts.

"Mutiny on the high sea may have been common a hundred years ago, but
in this good year 1888 it is the least likely of happenings.

"But there goes the captain to his cabin now.  If I am going to warn
him I might as well get the beastly job over for I have little stomach
to talk with the brute at all."

So saying he strolled carelessly in the direction of the companionway
through which the captain had passed, and a moment later was knocking
at his door.

"Come in," growled the deep tones of that surly officer.

And when Clayton had entered, and closed the door behind him:

"Well?"

"I have come to report the gist of a conversation I heard to-day,
because I feel that, while there may be nothing to it, it is as well
that you be forearmed.  In short, the men contemplate mutiny and
murder."

"It's a lie!" roared the captain.  "And if you have been interfering
again with the discipline of this ship, or meddling in affairs that
don't concern you you can take the consequences, and be damned.  I
don't care whether you are an English lord or not.  I'm captain of this
here ship, and from now on you keep your meddling nose out of my
business."

The captain had worked himself up to such a frenzy of rage that he was
fairly purple of face, and he shrieked the last words at the top of his
voice, emphasizing his remarks by a loud thumping of the table with one
huge fist, and shaking the other in Clayton's face.

Greystoke never turned a hair, but stood eying the excited man with
level gaze.

"Captain Billings," he drawled finally, "if you will pardon my candor,
I might remark that you are something of an ass."

Whereupon he turned and left the captain with the same indifferent ease
that was habitual with him, and which was more surely calculated to
raise the ire of a man of Billings' class than a torrent of invective.

So, whereas the captain might easily have been brought to regret his
hasty speech had Clayton attempted to conciliate him, his temper was
now irrevocably set in the mold in which Clayton had left it, and the
last chance of their working together for their common good was gone.

"Well, Alice," said Clayton, as he rejoined his wife, "I might have
saved my breath.  The fellow proved most ungrateful.  Fairly jumped at
me like a mad dog.

"He and his blasted old ship may hang, for aught I care; and until we
are safely off the thing I shall spend my energies in looking after our
own welfare.  And I rather fancy the first step to that end should be
to go to our cabin and look over my revolvers.  I am sorry now that we
packed the larger guns and the ammunition with the stuff below."

They found their quarters in a bad state of disorder.  Clothing from
their open boxes and bags strewed the little apartment, and even their
beds had been torn to pieces.

"Evidently someone was more anxious about our belongings than we," said
Clayton.  "Let's have a look around, Alice, and see what's missing."

A thorough search revealed the fact that nothing had been taken but
Clayton's two revolvers and the small supply of ammunition he had saved
out for them.

"Those are the very things I most wish they had left us," said Clayton,
"and the fact that they wished for them and them alone is most
sinister."

"What are we to do, John?" asked his wife.  "Perhaps you were right in
that our best chance lies in maintaining a neutral position.

"If the officers are able to prevent a mutiny, we have nothing to fear,
while if the mutineers are victorious our one slim hope lies in not
having attempted to thwart or antagonize them."

"Right you are, Alice.  We'll keep in the middle of the road."

As they started to straighten up their cabin, Clayton and his wife
simultaneously noticed the corner of a piece of paper protruding from
beneath the door of their quarters.  As Clayton stooped to reach for it
he was amazed to see it move further into the room, and then he
realized that it was being pushed inward by someone from without.

Quickly and silently he stepped toward the door, but, as he reached for
the knob to throw it open, his wife's hand fell upon his wrist.

"No, John," she whispered.  "They do not wish to be seen, and so we
cannot afford to see them.  Do not forget that we are keeping to the
middle of the road."

Clayton smiled and dropped his hand to his side.  Thus they stood
watching the little bit of white paper until it finally remained at
rest upon the floor just inside the door.

Then Clayton stooped and picked it up.  It was a bit of grimy, white
paper roughly folded into a ragged square.  Opening it they found a
crude message printed almost illegibly, and with many evidences of an
unaccustomed task.

Translated, it was a warning to the Claytons to refrain from reporting
the loss of the revolvers, or from repeating what the old sailor had
told them--to refrain on pain of death.

"I rather imagine we'll be good," said Clayton with a rueful smile.
"About all we can do is to sit tight and wait for whatever may come."




Chapter II

The Savage Home


Nor did they have long to wait, for the next morning as Clayton was
emerging on deck for his accustomed walk before breakfast, a shot rang
out, and then another, and another.

The sight which met his eyes confirmed his worst fears.  Facing the
little knot of officers was the entire motley crew of the Fuwalda, and
at their head stood Black Michael.

At the first volley from the officers the men ran for shelter, and from
points of vantage behind masts, wheel-house and cabin they returned the
fire of the five men who represented the hated authority of the ship.

Two of their number had gone down before the captain's revolver.  They
lay where they had fallen between the combatants.  But then the first
mate lunged forward upon his face, and at a cry of command from Black
Michael the mutineers charged the remaining four.  The crew had been
able to muster but six firearms, so most of them were armed with boat
hooks, axes, hatchets and crowbars.

The captain had emptied his revolver and was reloading as the charge
was made.  The second mate's gun had jammed, and so there were but two
weapons opposed to the mutineers as they bore down upon the officers,
who now started to give back before the infuriated rush of their men.

Both sides were cursing and swearing in a frightful manner, which,
together with the reports of the firearms and the screams and groans of
the wounded, turned the deck of the Fuwalda to the likeness of a
madhouse.

Before the officers had taken a dozen backward steps the men were upon
them.  An ax in the hands of a burly Negro cleft the captain from
forehead to chin, and an instant later the others were down: dead or
wounded from dozens of blows and bullet wounds.

Short and grisly had been the work of the mutineers of the Fuwalda, and
through it all John Clayton had stood leaning carelessly beside the
companionway puffing meditatively upon his pipe as though he had been
but watching an indifferent cricket match.

As the last officer went down he thought it was time that he returned
to his wife lest some members of the crew find her alone below.

Though outwardly calm and indifferent, Clayton was inwardly
apprehensive and wrought up, for he feared for his wife's safety at the
hands of these ignorant, half-brutes into whose hands fate had so
remorselessly thrown them.

As he turned to descend the ladder he was surprised to see his wife
standing on the steps almost at his side.

"How long have you been here, Alice?"

"Since the beginning," she replied.  "How awful, John.  Oh, how awful!
What can we hope for at the hands of such as those?"

"Breakfast, I hope," he answered, smiling bravely in an attempt to
allay her fears.

"At least," he added, "I'm going to ask them.  Come with me, Alice.  We
must not let them think we expect any but courteous treatment."

The men had by this time surrounded the dead and wounded officers, and
without either partiality or compassion proceeded to throw both living
and dead over the sides of the vessel.  With equal heartlessness they
disposed of their own dead and dying.

Presently one of the crew spied the approaching Claytons, and with a
cry of:  "Here's two more for the fishes," rushed toward them with
uplifted ax.

But Black Michael was even quicker, so that the fellow went down with a
bullet in his back before he had taken a half dozen steps.

With a loud roar, Black Michael attracted the attention of the others,
and, pointing to Lord and Lady Greystoke, cried:

"These here are my friends, and they are to be left alone.  D'ye
understand?

"I'm captain of this ship now, an' what I says goes," he added, turning
to Clayton.  "Just keep to yourselves, and nobody'll harm ye," and he
looked threateningly on his fellows.

The Claytons heeded Black Michael's instructions so well that they saw
but little of the crew and knew nothing of the plans the men were
making.

Occasionally they heard faint echoes of brawls and quarreling among the
mutineers, and on two occasions the vicious bark of firearms rang out
on the still air.  But Black Michael was a fit leader for this band of
cutthroats, and, withal held them in fair subjection to his rule.

On the fifth day following the murder of the ship's officers, land was
sighted by the lookout.  Whether island or mainland, Black Michael did
not know, but he announced to Clayton that if investigation showed that
the place was habitable he and Lady Greystoke were to be put ashore
with their belongings.

"You'll be all right there for a few months," he explained, "and by
that time we'll have been able to make an inhabited coast somewhere and
scatter a bit.  Then I'll see that yer gover'ment's notified where you
be an' they'll soon send a man-o'war to fetch ye off.

"It would be a hard matter to land you in civilization without a lot o'
questions being asked, an' none o' us here has any very convincin'
answers up our sleeves."

Clayton remonstrated against the inhumanity of landing them upon an
unknown shore to be left to the mercies of savage beasts, and,
possibly, still more savage men.

But his words were of no avail, and only tended to anger Black Michael,
so he was forced to desist and make the best he could of a bad
situation.

About three o'clock in the afternoon they came about off a beautiful
wooded shore opposite the mouth of what appeared to be a land-locked
harbor.

Black Michael sent a small boat filled with men to sound the entrance
in an effort to determine if the Fuwalda could be safely worked through
the entrance.

In about an hour they returned and reported deep water through the
passage as well as far into the little basin.

Before dark the barkentine lay peacefully at anchor upon the bosom of
the still, mirror-like surface of the harbor.

The surrounding shores were beautiful with semitropical verdure, while
in the distance the country rose from the ocean in hill and tableland,
almost uniformly clothed by primeval forest.

No signs of habitation were visible, but that the land might easily
support human life was evidenced by the abundant bird and animal life
of which the watchers on the Fuwalda's deck caught occasional glimpses,
as well as by the shimmer of a little river which emptied into the
harbor, insuring fresh water in plenitude.

As darkness settled upon the earth, Clayton and Lady Alice still stood
by the ship's rail in silent contemplation of their future abode.  From
the dark shadows of the mighty forest came the wild calls of savage
beasts--the deep roar of the lion, and, occasionally, the shrill scream
of a panther.

The woman shrank closer to the man in terror-stricken anticipation of
the horrors lying in wait for them in the awful blackness of the nights
to come, when they should be alone upon that wild and lonely shore.

Later in the evening Black Michael joined them long enough to instruct
them to make their preparations for landing on the morrow.  They tried
to persuade him to take them to some more hospitable coast near enough
to civilization so that they might hope to fall into friendly hands.
But no pleas, or threats, or promises of reward could move him.

"I am the only man aboard who would not rather see ye both safely dead,
and, while I know that's the sensible way to make sure of our own
necks, yet Black Michael's not the man to forget a favor.  Ye saved my
life once, and in return I'm goin' to spare yours, but that's all I can
do.

"The men won't stand for any more, and if we don't get ye landed pretty
quick they may even change their minds about giving ye that much show.
I'll put all yer stuff ashore with ye as well as cookin' utensils an'
some old sails for tents, an' enough grub to last ye until ye can find
fruit and game.

"With yer guns for protection, ye ought to be able to live here easy
enough until help comes.  When I get safely hid away I'll see to it
that the British gover'ment learns about where ye be; for the life of
me I couldn't tell 'em exactly where, for I don't know myself.  But
they'll find ye all right."

After he had left them they went silently below, each wrapped in gloomy
forebodings.

Clayton did not believe that Black Michael had the slightest intention
of notifying the British government of their whereabouts, nor was he
any too sure but that some treachery was contemplated for the following
day when they should be on shore with the sailors who would have to
accompany them with their belongings.

Once out of Black Michael's sight any of the men might strike them
down, and still leave Black Michael's conscience clear.

And even should they escape that fate was it not but to be faced with
far graver dangers?  Alone, he might hope to survive for years; for he
was a strong, athletic man.

But what of Alice, and that other little life so soon to be launched
amidst the hardships and grave dangers of a primeval world?

The man shuddered as he meditated upon the awful gravity, the fearful
helplessness, of their situation.  But it was a merciful Providence
which prevented him from foreseeing the hideous reality which awaited
them in the grim depths of that gloomy wood.

Early next morning their numerous chests and boxes were hoisted on deck
and lowered to waiting small boats for transportation to shore.

There was a great quantity and variety of stuff, as the Claytons had
expected a possible five to eight years' residence in their new home.
Thus, in addition to the many necessities they had brought, there were
also many luxuries.

Black Michael was determined that nothing belonging to the Claytons
should be left on board.  Whether out of compassion for them, or in
furtherance of his own self-interests, it would be difficult to say.

There was no question but that the presence of property of a missing
British official upon a suspicious vessel would have been a difficult
thing to explain in any civilized port in the world.

So zealous was he in his efforts to carry out his intentions that he
insisted upon the return of Clayton's revolvers to him by the sailors
in whose possession they were.

Into the small boats were also loaded salt meats and biscuit, with a
small supply of potatoes and beans, matches, and cooking vessels, a
chest of tools, and the old sails which Black Michael had promised them.

As though himself fearing the very thing which Clayton had suspected,
Black Michael accompanied them to shore, and was the last to leave them
when the small boats, having filled the ship's casks with fresh water,
were pushed out toward the waiting Fuwalda.

As the boats moved slowly over the smooth waters of the bay, Clayton
and his wife stood silently watching their departure--in the breasts of
both a feeling of impending disaster and utter hopelessness.

And behind them, over the edge of a low ridge, other eyes
watched--close set, wicked eyes, gleaming beneath shaggy brows.

As the Fuwalda passed through the narrow entrance to the harbor and out
of sight behind a projecting point, Lady Alice threw her arms about
Clayton's neck and burst into uncontrolled sobs.

Bravely had she faced the dangers of the mutiny; with heroic fortitude
she had looked into the terrible future; but now that the horror of
absolute solitude was upon them, her overwrought nerves gave way, and
the reaction came.

He did not attempt to check her tears.  It were better that nature have
her way in relieving these long-pent emotions, and it was many minutes
before the girl--little more than a child she was--could again gain
mastery of herself.

"Oh, John," she cried at last, "the horror of it.  What are we to do?
What are we to do?"

"There is but one thing to do, Alice," and he spoke as quietly as
though they were sitting in their snug living room at home, "and that
is work.  Work must be our salvation.  We must not give ourselves time
to think, for in that direction lies madness.

"We must work and wait.  I am sure that relief will come, and come
quickly, when once it is apparent that the Fuwalda has been lost, even
though Black Michael does not keep his word to us."

"But John, if it were only you and I," she sobbed, "we could endure it
I know; but--"

"Yes, dear," he answered, gently, "I have been thinking of that, also;
but we must face it, as we must face whatever comes, bravely and with
the utmost confidence in our ability to cope with circumstances
whatever they may be.

"Hundreds of thousands of years ago our ancestors of the dim and
distant past faced the same problems which we must face, possibly in
these same primeval forests.  That we are here today evidences their
victory.

"What they did may we not do?  And even better, for are we not armed
with ages of superior knowledge, and have we not the means of
protection, defense, and sustenance which science has given us, but of
which they were totally ignorant?  What they accomplished, Alice, with
instruments and weapons of stone and bone, surely that may we
accomplish also."

"Ah, John, I wish that I might be a man with a man's philosophy, but I
am but a woman, seeing with my heart rather than my head, and all that
I can see is too horrible, too unthinkable to put into words.

"I only hope you are right, John.  I will do my best to be a brave
primeval woman, a fit mate for the primeval man."

Clayton's first thought was to arrange a sleeping shelter for the
night; something which might serve to protect them from prowling beasts
of prey.

He opened the box containing his rifles and ammunition, that they might
both be armed against possible attack while at work, and then together
they sought a location for their first night's sleeping place.

A hundred yards from the beach was a little level spot, fairly free of
trees; here they decided eventually to build a permanent house, but for
the time being they both thought it best to construct a little platform
in the trees out of reach of the larger of the savage beasts in whose
realm they were.

To this end Clayton selected four trees which formed a rectangle about
eight feet square, and cutting long branches from other trees he
constructed a framework around them, about ten feet from the ground,
fastening the ends of the branches securely to the trees by means of
rope, a quantity of which Black Michael had furnished him from the hold
of the Fuwalda.

Across this framework Clayton placed other smaller branches quite close
together.  This platform he paved with the huge fronds of elephant's
ear which grew in profusion about them, and over the fronds he laid a
great sail folded into several thicknesses.

Seven feet higher he constructed a similar, though lighter platform to
serve as roof, and from the sides of this he suspended the balance of
his sailcloth for walls.

When completed he had a rather snug little nest, to which he carried
their blankets and some of the lighter luggage.

It was now late in the afternoon, and the balance of the daylight hours
were devoted to the building of a rude ladder by means of which Lady
Alice could mount to her new home.

All during the day the forest about them had been filled with excited
birds of brilliant plumage, and dancing, chattering monkeys, who
watched these new arrivals and their wonderful nest building operations
with every mark of keenest interest and fascination.

Notwithstanding that both Clayton and his wife kept a sharp lookout
they saw nothing of larger animals, though on two occasions they had
seen their little simian neighbors come screaming and chattering from
the near-by ridge, casting frightened glances back over their little
shoulders, and evincing as plainly as though by speech that they were
fleeing some terrible thing which lay concealed there.

Just before dusk Clayton finished his ladder, and, filling a great
basin with water from the near-by stream, the two mounted to the
comparative safety of their aerial chamber.

As it was quite warm, Clayton had left the side curtains thrown back
over the roof, and as they sat, like Turks, upon their blankets, Lady
Alice, straining her eyes into the darkening shadows of the wood,
suddenly reached out and grasped Clayton's arms.

"John," she whispered, "look!  What is it, a man?"

As Clayton turned his eyes in the direction she indicated, he saw
silhouetted dimly against the shadows beyond, a great figure standing
upright upon the ridge.

For a moment it stood as though listening and then turned slowly, and
melted into the shadows of the jungle.

"What is it, John?"

"I do not know, Alice," he answered gravely, "it is too dark to see so
far, and it may have been but a shadow cast by the rising moon."

"No, John, if it was not a man it was some huge and grotesque mockery
of man.  Oh, I am afraid."

He gathered her in his arms, whispering words of courage and love into
her ears.

Soon after, he lowered the curtain walls, tying them securely to the
trees so that, except for a little opening toward the beach, they were
entirely enclosed.

As it was now pitch dark within their tiny aerie they lay down upon
their blankets to try to gain, through sleep, a brief respite of
forgetfulness.

Clayton lay facing the opening at the front, a rifle and a brace of
revolvers at his hand.

Scarcely had they closed their eyes than the terrifying cry of a
panther rang out from the jungle behind them.  Closer and closer it
came until they could hear the great beast directly beneath them.  For
an hour or more they heard it sniffing and clawing at the trees which
supported their platform, but at last it roamed away across the beach,
where Clayton could see it clearly in the brilliant moonlight--a great,
handsome beast, the largest he had ever seen.

During the long hours of darkness they caught but fitful snatches of
sleep, for the night noises of a great jungle teeming with myriad
animal life kept their overwrought nerves on edge, so that a hundred
times they were startled to wakefulness by piercing screams, or the
stealthy moving of great bodies beneath them.




Chapter III

Life and Death


Morning found them but little, if at all refreshed, though it was with
a feeling of intense relief that they saw the day dawn.

As soon as they had made their meager breakfast of salt pork, coffee
and biscuit, Clayton commenced work upon their house, for he realized
that they could hope for no safety and no peace of mind at night until
four strong walls effectually barred the jungle life from them.

The task was an arduous one and required the better part of a month,
though he built but one small room.  He constructed his cabin of small
logs about six inches in diameter, stopping the chinks with clay which
he found at the depth of a few feet beneath the surface soil.

At one end he built a fireplace of small stones from the beach.  These
also he set in clay and when the house had been entirely completed he
applied a coating of the clay to the entire outside surface to the
thickness of four inches.

In the window opening he set small branches about an inch in diameter
both vertically and horizontally, and so woven that they formed a
substantial grating that could withstand the strength of a powerful
animal.  Thus they obtained air and proper ventilation without fear of
lessening the safety of their cabin.

The A-shaped roof was thatched with small branches laid close together
and over these long jungle grass and palm fronds, with a final coating
of clay.

The door he built of pieces of the packing-boxes which had held their
belongings, nailing one piece upon another, the grain of contiguous
layers running transversely, until he had a solid body some three
inches thick and of such great strength that they were both moved to
laughter as they gazed upon it.

Here the greatest difficulty confronted Clayton, for he had no means
whereby to hang his massive door now that he had built it.  After two
days' work, however, he succeeded in fashioning two massive hardwood
hinges, and with these he hung the door so that it opened and closed
easily.

The stuccoing and other final touches were added after they moved into
the house, which they had done as soon as the roof was on, piling their
boxes before the door at night and thus having a comparatively safe and
comfortable habitation.

The building of a bed, chairs, table, and shelves was a relatively easy
matter, so that by the end of the second month they were well settled,
and, but for the constant dread of attack by wild beasts and the ever
growing loneliness, they were not uncomfortable or unhappy.

At night great beasts snarled and roared about their tiny cabin, but,
so accustomed may one become to oft repeated noises, that soon they
paid little attention to them, sleeping soundly the whole night through.

Thrice had they caught fleeting glimpses of great man-like figures like
that of the first night, but never at sufficiently close range to know
positively whether the half-seen forms were those of man or brute.

The brilliant birds and the little monkeys had become accustomed to
their new acquaintances, and as they had evidently never seen human
beings before they presently, after their first fright had worn off,
approached closer and closer, impelled by that strange curiosity which
dominates the wild creatures of the forest and the jungle and the
plain, so that within the first month several of the birds had gone so
far as even to accept morsels of food from the friendly hands of the
Claytons.

One afternoon, while Clayton was working upon an addition to their
cabin, for he contemplated building several more rooms, a number of
their grotesque little friends came shrieking and scolding through the
trees from the direction of the ridge.  Ever as they fled they cast
fearful glances back of them, and finally they stopped near Clayton
jabbering excitedly to him as though to warn him of approaching danger.

At last he saw it, the thing the little monkeys so feared--the
man-brute of which the Claytons had caught occasional fleeting glimpses.

It was approaching through the jungle in a semi-erect position, now and
then placing the backs of its closed fists upon the ground--a great
anthropoid ape, and, as it advanced, it emitted deep guttural growls
and an occasional low barking sound.

Clayton was at some distance from the cabin, having come to fell a
particularly perfect tree for his building operations.  Grown careless
from months of continued safety, during which time he had seen no
dangerous animals during the daylight hours, he had left his rifles and
revolvers all within the little cabin, and now that he saw the great
ape crashing through the underbrush directly toward him, and from a
direction which practically cut him off from escape, he felt a vague
little shiver play up and down his spine.

He knew that, armed only with an ax, his chances with this ferocious
monster were small indeed--and Alice; O God, he thought, what will
become of Alice?

There was yet a slight chance of reaching the cabin.  He turned and ran
toward it, shouting an alarm to his wife to run in and close the great
door in case the ape cut off his retreat.

Lady Greystoke had been sitting a little way from the cabin, and when
she heard his cry she looked up to see the ape springing with almost
incredible swiftness, for so large and awkward an animal, in an effort
to head off Clayton.

With a low cry she sprang toward the cabin, and, as she entered, gave a
backward glance which filled her soul with terror, for the brute had
intercepted her husband, who now stood at bay grasping his ax with both
hands ready to swing it upon the infuriated animal when he should make
his final charge.

"Close and bolt the door, Alice," cried Clayton.  "I can finish this
fellow with my ax."

But he knew he was facing a horrible death, and so did she.

The ape was a great bull, weighing probably three hundred pounds.  His
nasty, close-set eyes gleamed hatred from beneath his shaggy brows,
while his great canine fangs were bared in a horrid snarl as he paused
a moment before his prey.

Over the brute's shoulder Clayton could see the doorway of his cabin,
not twenty paces distant, and a great wave of horror and fear swept
over him as he saw his young wife emerge, armed with one of his rifles.

She had always been afraid of firearms, and would never touch them, but
now she rushed toward the ape with the fearlessness of a lioness
protecting its young.

"Back, Alice," shouted Clayton, "for God's sake, go back."

But she would not heed, and just then the ape charged, so that Clayton
could say no more.

The man swung his ax with all his mighty strength, but the powerful
brute seized it in those terrible hands, and tearing it from Clayton's
grasp hurled it far to one side.

With an ugly snarl he closed upon his defenseless victim, but ere his
fangs had reached the throat they thirsted for, there was a sharp
report and a bullet entered the ape's back between his shoulders.

Throwing Clayton to the ground the beast turned upon his new enemy.
There before him stood the terrified girl vainly trying to fire another
bullet into the animal's body; but she did not understand the mechanism
of the firearm, and the hammer fell futilely upon an empty cartridge.

Almost simultaneously Clayton regained his feet, and without thought of
the utter hopelessness of it, he rushed forward to drag the ape from
his wife's prostrate form.

With little or no effort he succeeded, and the great bulk rolled
inertly upon the turf before him--the ape was dead.  The bullet had
done its work.

A hasty examination of his wife revealed no marks upon her, and Clayton
decided that the huge brute had died the instant he had sprung toward
Alice.

Gently he lifted his wife's still unconscious form, and bore her to the
little cabin, but it was fully two hours before she regained
consciousness.

Her first words filled Clayton with vague apprehension.  For some time
after regaining her senses, Alice gazed wonderingly about the interior
of the little cabin, and then, with a satisfied sigh, said:

"O, John, it is so good to be really home!  I have had an awful dream,
dear.  I thought we were no longer in London, but in some horrible
place where great beasts attacked us."

"There, there, Alice," he said, stroking her forehead, "try to sleep
again, and do not worry your head about bad dreams."

That night a little son was born in the tiny cabin beside the primeval
forest, while a leopard screamed before the door, and the deep notes of
a lion's roar sounded from beyond the ridge.

Lady Greystoke never recovered from the shock of the great ape's
attack, and, though she lived for a year after her baby was born, she
was never again outside the cabin, nor did she ever fully realize that
she was not in England.

Sometimes she would question Clayton as to the strange noises of the
nights; the absence of servants and friends, and the strange rudeness
of the furnishings within her room, but, though he made no effort to
deceive her, never could she grasp the meaning of it all.

In other ways she was quite rational, and the joy and happiness she
took in the possession of her little son and the constant attentions of
her husband made that year a very happy one for her, the happiest of
her young life.

That it would have been beset by worries and apprehension had she been
in full command of her mental faculties Clayton well knew; so that
while he suffered terribly to see her so, there were times when he was
almost glad, for her sake, that she could not understand.

Long since had he given up any hope of rescue, except through accident.
With unremitting zeal he had worked to beautify the interior of the
cabin.

Skins of lion and panther covered the floor.  Cupboards and bookcases
lined the walls.  Odd vases made by his own hand from the clay of the
region held beautiful tropical flowers.  Curtains of grass and bamboo
covered the windows, and, most arduous task of all, with his meager
assortment of tools he had fashioned lumber to neatly seal the walls
and ceiling and lay a smooth floor within the cabin.

That he had been able to turn his hands at all to such unaccustomed
labor was a source of mild wonder to him.  But he loved the work
because it was for her and the tiny life that had come to cheer them,
though adding a hundredfold to his responsibilities and to the
terribleness of their situation.

During the year that followed, Clayton was several times attacked by
the great apes which now seemed to continually infest the vicinity of
the cabin; but as he never again ventured outside without both rifle
and revolvers he had little fear of the huge beasts.

He had strengthened the window protections and fitted a unique wooden
lock to the cabin door, so that when he hunted for game and fruits, as
it was constantly necessary for him to do to insure sustenance, he had
no fear that any animal could break into the little home.

At first he shot much of the game from the cabin windows, but toward
the end the animals learned to fear the strange lair from whence issued
the terrifying thunder of his rifle.

In his leisure Clayton read, often aloud to his wife, from the store of
books he had brought for their new home.  Among these were many for
little children--picture books, primers, readers--for they had known
that their little child would be old enough for such before they might
hope to return to England.

At other times Clayton wrote in his diary, which he had always been
accustomed to keep in French, and in which he recorded the details of
their strange life.  This book he kept locked in a little metal box.

A year from the day her little son was born Lady Alice passed quietly
away in the night.  So peaceful was her end that it was hours before
Clayton could awake to a realization that his wife was dead.

The horror of the situation came to him very slowly, and it is doubtful
that he ever fully realized the enormity of his sorrow and the fearful
responsibility that had devolved upon him with the care of that wee
thing, his son, still a nursing babe.

The last entry in his diary was made the morning following her death,
and there he recites the sad details in a matter-of-fact way that adds
to the pathos of it; for it breathes a tired apathy born of long sorrow
and hopelessness, which even this cruel blow could scarcely awake to
further suffering:


My little son is crying for nourishment--O Alice, Alice, what shall I
do?


And as John Clayton wrote the last words his hand was destined ever to
pen, he dropped his head wearily upon his outstretched arms where they
rested upon the table he had built for her who lay still and cold in
the bed beside him.

For a long time no sound broke the deathlike stillness of the jungle
midday save the piteous wailing of the tiny man-child.




Chapter IV

The Apes


In the forest of the table-land a mile back from the ocean old Kerchak
the Ape was on a rampage of rage among his people.

The younger and lighter members of his tribe scampered to the higher
branches of the great trees to escape his wrath; risking their lives
upon branches that scarce supported their weight rather than face old
Kerchak in one of his fits of uncontrolled anger.

The other males scattered in all directions, but not before the
infuriated brute had felt the vertebra of one snap between his great,
foaming jaws.

A luckless young female slipped from an insecure hold upon a high
branch and came crashing to the ground almost at Kerchak's feet.

With a wild scream he was upon her, tearing a great piece from her side
with his mighty teeth, and striking her viciously upon her head and
shoulders with a broken tree limb until her skull was crushed to a
jelly.

And then he spied Kala, who, returning from a search for food with her
young babe, was ignorant of the state of the mighty male's temper until
suddenly the shrill warnings of her fellows caused her to scamper madly
for safety.

But Kerchak was close upon her, so close that he had almost grasped her
ankle had she not made a furious leap far into space from one tree to
another--a perilous chance which apes seldom if ever take, unless so
closely pursued by danger that there is no alternative.

She made the leap successfully, but as she grasped the limb of the
further tree the sudden jar loosened the hold of the tiny babe where it
clung frantically to her neck, and she saw the little thing hurled,
turning and twisting, to the ground thirty feet below.

With a low cry of dismay Kala rushed headlong to its side, thoughtless
now of the danger from Kerchak; but when she gathered the wee, mangled
form to her bosom life had left it.

With low moans, she sat cuddling the body to her; nor did Kerchak
attempt to molest her.  With the death of the babe his fit of
demoniacal rage passed as suddenly as it had seized him.

Kerchak was a huge king ape, weighing perhaps three hundred and fifty
pounds.  His forehead was extremely low and receding, his eyes
bloodshot, small and close set to his coarse, flat nose; his ears large
and thin, but smaller than most of his kind.

His awful temper and his mighty strength made him supreme among the
little tribe into which he had been born some twenty years before.

Now that he was in his prime, there was no simian in all the mighty
forest through which he roved that dared contest his right to rule, nor
did the other and larger animals molest him.

Old Tantor, the elephant, alone of all the wild savage life, feared him
not--and he alone did Kerchak fear.  When Tantor trumpeted, the great
ape scurried with his fellows high among the trees of the second
terrace.

The tribe of anthropoids over which Kerchak ruled with an iron hand and
bared fangs, numbered some six or eight families, each family
consisting of an adult male with his females and their young, numbering
in all some sixty or seventy apes.

Kala was the youngest mate of a male called Tublat, meaning broken
nose, and the child she had seen dashed to death was her first; for she
was but nine or ten years old.

Notwithstanding her youth, she was large and powerful--a splendid,
clean-limbed animal, with a round, high forehead, which denoted more
intelligence than most of her kind possessed.  So, also, she had a
great capacity for mother love and mother sorrow.

But she was still an ape, a huge, fierce, terrible beast of a species
closely allied to the gorilla, yet more intelligent; which, with the
strength of their cousin, made her kind the most fearsome of those
awe-inspiring progenitors of man.

When the tribe saw that Kerchak's rage had ceased they came slowly down
from their arboreal retreats and pursued again the various occupations
which he had interrupted.

The young played and frolicked about among the trees and bushes.  Some
of the adults lay prone upon the soft mat of dead and decaying
vegetation which covered the ground, while others turned over pieces of
fallen branches and clods of earth in search of the small bugs and
reptiles which formed a part of their food.

Others, again, searched the surrounding trees for fruit, nuts, small
birds, and eggs.

They had passed an hour or so thus when Kerchak called them together,
and, with a word of command to them to follow him, set off toward the
sea.

They traveled for the most part upon the ground, where it was open,
following the path of the great elephants whose comings and goings
break the only roads through those tangled mazes of bush, vine,
creeper, and tree.  When they walked it was with a rolling, awkward
motion, placing the knuckles of their closed hands upon the ground and
swinging their ungainly bodies forward.

But when the way was through the lower trees they moved more swiftly,
swinging from branch to branch with the agility of their smaller
cousins, the monkeys.  And all the way Kala carried her little dead
baby hugged closely to her breast.

It was shortly after noon when they reached a ridge overlooking the
beach where below them lay the tiny cottage which was Kerchak's goal.

He had seen many of his kind go to their deaths before the loud noise
made by the little black stick in the hands of the strange white ape
who lived in that wonderful lair, and Kerchak had made up his brute
mind to own that death-dealing contrivance, and to explore the interior
of the mysterious den.

He wanted, very, very much, to feel his teeth sink into the neck of the
queer animal that he had learned to hate and fear, and because of this,
he came often with his tribe to reconnoiter, waiting for a time when
the white ape should be off his guard.

Of late they had quit attacking, or even showing themselves; for every
time they had done so in the past the little stick had roared out its
terrible message of death to some member of the tribe.

Today there was no sign of the man about, and from where they watched
they could see that the cabin door was open.  Slowly, cautiously, and
noiselessly they crept through the jungle toward the little cabin.

There were no growls, no fierce screams of rage--the little black stick
had taught them to come quietly lest they awaken it.

On, on they came until Kerchak himself slunk stealthily to the very
door and peered within.  Behind him were two males, and then Kala,
closely straining the little dead form to her breast.

Inside the den they saw the strange white ape lying half across a
table, his head buried in his arms; and on the bed lay a figure covered
by a sailcloth, while from a tiny rustic cradle came the plaintive
wailing of a babe.

Noiselessly Kerchak entered, crouching for the charge; and then John
Clayton rose with a sudden start and faced them.

The sight that met his eyes must have frozen him with horror, for
there, within the door, stood three great bull apes, while behind them
crowded many more; how many he never knew, for his revolvers were
hanging on the far wall beside his rifle, and Kerchak was charging.

When the king ape released the limp form which had been John Clayton,
Lord Greystoke, he turned his attention toward the little cradle; but
Kala was there before him, and when he would have grasped the child she
snatched it herself, and before he could intercept her she had bolted
through the door and taken refuge in a high tree.

As she took up the little live baby of Alice Clayton she dropped the
dead body of her own into the empty cradle; for the wail of the living
had answered the call of universal motherhood within her wild breast
which the dead could not still.

High up among the branches of a mighty tree she hugged the shrieking
infant to her bosom, and soon the instinct that was as dominant in this
fierce female as it had been in the breast of his tender and beautiful
mother--the instinct of mother love--reached out to the tiny
man-child's half-formed understanding, and he became quiet.

Then hunger closed the gap between them, and the son of an English lord
and an English lady nursed at the breast of Kala, the great ape.

In the meantime the beasts within the cabin were warily examining the
contents of this strange lair.

Once satisfied that Clayton was dead, Kerchak turned his attention to
the thing which lay upon the bed, covered by a piece of sailcloth.

Gingerly he lifted one corner of the shroud, but when he saw the body
of the woman beneath he tore the cloth roughly from her form and seized
the still, white throat in his huge, hairy hands.

A moment he let his fingers sink deep into the cold flesh, and then,
realizing that she was already dead, he turned from her, to examine the
contents of the room; nor did he again molest the body of either Lady
Alice or Sir John.

The rifle hanging upon the wall caught his first attention; it was for
this strange, death-dealing thunder-stick that he had yearned for
months; but now that it was within his grasp he scarcely had the
temerity to seize it.

Cautiously he approached the thing, ready to flee precipitately should
it speak in its deep roaring tones, as he had heard it speak before,
the last words to those of his kind who, through ignorance or rashness,
had attacked the wonderful white ape that had borne it.

Deep in the beast's intelligence was something which assured him that
the thunder-stick was only dangerous when in the hands of one who could
manipulate it, but yet it was several minutes ere he could bring
himself to touch it.

Instead, he walked back and forth along the floor before it, turning
his head so that never once did his eyes leave the object of his desire.

Using his long arms as a man uses crutches, and rolling his huge
carcass from side to side with each stride, the great king ape paced to
and fro, uttering deep growls, occasionally punctuated with the
ear-piercing scream, than which there is no more terrifying noise in
all the jungle.

Presently he halted before the rifle.  Slowly he raised a huge hand
until it almost touched the shining barrel, only to withdraw it once
more and continue his hurried pacing.

It was as though the great brute by this show of fearlessness, and
through the medium of his wild voice, was endeavoring to bolster up his
courage to the point which would permit him to take the rifle in his
hand.

Again he stopped, and this time succeeded in forcing his reluctant hand
to the cold steel, only to snatch it away almost immediately and resume
his restless beat.

Time after time this strange ceremony was repeated, but on each
occasion with increased confidence, until, finally, the rifle was torn
from its hook and lay in the grasp of the great brute.

Finding that it harmed him not, Kerchak began to examine it closely.
He felt of it from end to end, peered down the black depths of the
muzzle, fingered the sights, the breech, the stock, and finally the
trigger.

During all these operations the apes who had entered sat huddled near
the door watching their chief, while those outside strained and crowded
to catch a glimpse of what transpired within.

Suddenly Kerchak's finger closed upon the trigger.  There was a
deafening roar in the little room and the apes at and beyond the door
fell over one another in their wild anxiety to escape.

Kerchak was equally frightened, so frightened, in fact, that he quite
forgot to throw aside the author of that fearful noise, but bolted for
the door with it tightly clutched in one hand.

As he passed through the opening, the front sight of the rifle caught
upon the edge of the inswung door with sufficient force to close it
tightly after the fleeing ape.

When Kerchak came to a halt a short distance from the cabin and
discovered that he still held the rifle, he dropped it as he might have
dropped a red hot iron, nor did he again attempt to recover it--the
noise was too much for his brute nerves; but he was now quite convinced
that the terrible stick was quite harmless by itself if left alone.

It was an hour before the apes could again bring themselves to approach
the cabin to continue their investigations, and when they finally did
so, they found to their chagrin that the door was closed and so
securely fastened that they could not force it.

The cleverly constructed latch which Clayton had made for the door had
sprung as Kerchak passed out; nor could the apes find means of ingress
through the heavily barred windows.

After roaming about the vicinity for a short time, they started back
for the deeper forests and the higher land from whence they had come.

Kala had not once come to earth with her little adopted babe, but now
Kerchak called to her to descend with the rest, and as there was no
note of anger in his voice she dropped lightly from branch to branch
and joined the others on their homeward march.

Those of the apes who attempted to examine Kala's strange baby were
repulsed with bared fangs and low menacing growls, accompanied by words
of warning from Kala.

When they assured her that they meant the child no harm she permitted
them to come close, but would not allow them to touch her charge.

It was as though she knew that her baby was frail and delicate and
feared lest the rough hands of her fellows might injure the little
thing.

Another thing she did, and which made traveling an onerous trial for
her.  Remembering the death of her own little one, she clung
desperately to the new babe, with one hand, whenever they were upon the
march.

The other young rode upon their mothers' backs; their little arms
tightly clasping the hairy necks before them, while their legs were
locked beneath their mothers' armpits.

Not so with Kala; she held the small form of the little Lord Greystoke
tightly to her breast, where the dainty hands clutched the long black
hair which covered that portion of her body.  She had seen one child
fall from her back to a terrible death, and she would take no further
chances with this.




Chapter V

The White Ape


Tenderly Kala nursed her little waif, wondering silently why it did not
gain strength and agility as did the little apes of other mothers.  It
was nearly a year from the time the little fellow came into her
possession before he would walk alone, and as for climbing--my, but how
stupid he was!

Kala sometimes talked with the older females about her young hopeful,
but none of them could understand how a child could be so slow and
backward in learning to care for itself.  Why, it could not even find
food alone, and more than twelve moons had passed since Kala had come
upon it.

Had they known that the child had seen thirteen moons before it had
come into Kala's possession they would have considered its case as
absolutely hopeless, for the little apes of their own tribe were as far
advanced in two or three moons as was this little stranger after
twenty-five.

Tublat, Kala's husband, was sorely vexed, and but for the female's
careful watching would have put the child out of the way.

"He will never be a great ape," he argued.  "Always will you have to
carry him and protect him.  What good will he be to the tribe?  None;
only a burden.

"Let us leave him quietly sleeping among the tall grasses, that you may
bear other and stronger apes to guard us in our old age."

"Never, Broken Nose," replied Kala.  "If I must carry him forever, so
be it."

And then Tublat went to Kerchak to urge him to use his authority with
Kala, and force her to give up little Tarzan, which was the name they
had given to the tiny Lord Greystoke, and which meant "White-Skin."

But when Kerchak spoke to her about it Kala threatened to run away from
the tribe if they did not leave her in peace with the child; and as
this is one of the inalienable rights of the jungle folk, if they be
dissatisfied among their own people, they bothered her no more, for
Kala was a fine clean-limbed young female, and they did not wish to
lose her.

As Tarzan grew he made more rapid strides, so that by the time he was
ten years old he was an excellent climber, and on the ground could do
many wonderful things which were beyond the powers of his little
brothers and sisters.

In many ways did he differ from them, and they often marveled at his
superior cunning, but in strength and size he was deficient; for at ten
the great anthropoids were fully grown, some of them towering over six
feet in height, while little Tarzan was still but a half-grown boy.

Yet such a boy!

From early childhood he had used his hands to swing from branch to
branch after the manner of his giant mother, and as he grew older he
spent hour upon hour daily speeding through the tree tops with his
brothers and sisters.

He could spring twenty feet across space at the dizzy heights of the
forest top, and grasp with unerring precision, and without apparent
jar, a limb waving wildly in the path of an approaching tornado.

He could drop twenty feet at a stretch from limb to limb in rapid
descent to the ground, or he could gain the utmost pinnacle of the
loftiest tropical giant with the ease and swiftness of a squirrel.

Though but ten years old he was fully as strong as the average man of
thirty, and far more agile than the most practiced athlete ever
becomes.  And day by day his strength was increasing.

His life among these fierce apes had been happy; for his recollection
held no other life, nor did he know that there existed within the
universe aught else than his little forest and the wild jungle animals
with which he was familiar.

He was nearly ten before he commenced to realize that a great
difference existed between himself and his fellows.  His little body,
burned brown by exposure, suddenly caused him feelings of intense
shame, for he realized that it was entirely hairless, like some low
snake, or other reptile.

He attempted to obviate this by plastering himself from head to foot
with mud, but this dried and fell off.  Besides it felt so
uncomfortable that he quickly decided that he preferred the shame to
the discomfort.

In the higher land which his tribe frequented was a little lake, and it
was here that Tarzan first saw his face in the clear, still waters of
its bosom.

It was on a sultry day of the dry season that he and one of his cousins
had gone down to the bank to drink.  As they leaned over, both little
faces were mirrored on the placid pool; the fierce and terrible
features of the ape beside those of the aristocratic scion of an old
English house.

Tarzan was appalled.  It had been bad enough to be hairless, but to own
such a countenance!  He wondered that the other apes could look at him
at all.

That tiny slit of a mouth and those puny white teeth!  How they looked
beside the mighty lips and powerful fangs of his more fortunate
brothers!

And the little pinched nose of his; so thin was it that it looked half
starved.  He turned red as he compared it with the beautiful broad
nostrils of his companion.  Such a generous nose!  Why it spread half
across his face!  It certainly must be fine to be so handsome, thought
poor little Tarzan.

But when he saw his own eyes; ah, that was the final blow--a brown
spot, a gray circle and then blank whiteness!  Frightful! not even the
snakes had such hideous eyes as he.

So intent was he upon this personal appraisement of his features that
he did not hear the parting of the tall grass behind him as a great
body pushed itself stealthily through the jungle; nor did his
companion, the ape, hear either, for he was drinking and the noise of
his sucking lips and gurgles of satisfaction drowned the quiet approach
of the intruder.

Not thirty paces behind the two she crouched--Sabor, the huge
lioness--lashing her tail.  Cautiously she moved a great padded paw
forward, noiselessly placing it before she lifted the next.  Thus she
advanced; her belly low, almost touching the surface of the ground--a
great cat preparing to spring upon its prey.

Now she was within ten feet of the two unsuspecting little
playfellows--carefully she drew her hind feet well up beneath her body,
the great muscles rolling under the beautiful skin.

So low she was crouching now that she seemed flattened to the earth
except for the upward bend of the glossy back as it gathered for the
spring.

No longer the tail lashed--quiet and straight behind her it lay.

An instant she paused thus, as though turned to stone, and then, with
an awful scream, she sprang.

Sabor, the lioness, was a wise hunter.  To one less wise the wild alarm
of her fierce cry as she sprang would have seemed a foolish thing, for
could she not more surely have fallen upon her victims had she but
quietly leaped without that loud shriek?

But Sabor knew well the wondrous quickness of the jungle folk and their
almost unbelievable powers of hearing.  To them the sudden scraping of
one blade of grass across another was as effectual a warning as her
loudest cry, and Sabor knew that she could not make that mighty leap
without a little noise.

Her wild scream was not a warning.  It was voiced to freeze her poor
victims in a paralysis of terror for the tiny fraction of an instant
which would suffice for her mighty claws to sink into their soft flesh
and hold them beyond hope of escape.

So far as the ape was concerned, Sabor reasoned correctly.  The little
fellow crouched trembling just an instant, but that instant was quite
long enough to prove his undoing.

Not so, however, with Tarzan, the man-child.  His life amidst the
dangers of the jungle had taught him to meet emergencies with
self-confidence, and his higher intelligence resulted in a quickness of
mental action far beyond the powers of the apes.

So the scream of Sabor, the lioness, galvanized the brain and muscles
of little Tarzan into instant action.

Before him lay the deep waters of the little lake, behind him certain
death; a cruel death beneath tearing claws and rending fangs.

Tarzan had always hated water except as a medium for quenching his
thirst.  He hated it because he connected it with the chill and
discomfort of the torrential rains, and he feared it for the thunder
and lightning and wind which accompanied them.

The deep waters of the lake he had been taught by his wild mother to
avoid, and further, had he not seen little Neeta sink beneath its quiet
surface only a few short weeks before never to return to the tribe?

But of the two evils his quick mind chose the lesser ere the first note
of Sabor's scream had scarce broken the quiet of the jungle, and before
the great beast had covered half her leap Tarzan felt the chill waters
close above his head.

He could not swim, and the water was very deep; but still he lost no
particle of that self-confidence and resourcefulness which were the
badges of his superior being.

Rapidly he moved his hands and feet in an attempt to scramble upward,
and, possibly more by chance than design, he fell into the stroke that
a dog uses when swimming, so that within a few seconds his nose was
above water and he found that he could keep it there by continuing his
strokes, and also make progress through the water.

He was much surprised and pleased with this new acquirement which had
been so suddenly thrust upon him, but he had no time for thinking much
upon it.

He was now swimming parallel to the bank and there he saw the cruel
beast that would have seized him crouching upon the still form of his
little playmate.

The lioness was intently watching Tarzan, evidently expecting him to
return to shore, but this the boy had no intention of doing.

Instead he raised his voice in the call of distress common to his
tribe, adding to it the warning which would prevent would-be rescuers
from running into the clutches of Sabor.

Almost immediately there came an answer from the distance, and
presently forty or fifty great apes swung rapidly and majestically
through the trees toward the scene of tragedy.

In the lead was Kala, for she had recognized the tones of her best
beloved, and with her was the mother of the little ape who lay dead
beneath cruel Sabor.

Though more powerful and better equipped for fighting than the apes,
the lioness had no desire to meet these enraged adults, and with a
snarl of hatred she sprang quickly into the brush and disappeared.

Tarzan now swam to shore and clambered quickly upon dry land.  The
feeling of freshness and exhilaration which the cool waters had
imparted to him, filled his little being with grateful surprise, and
ever after he lost no opportunity to take a daily plunge in lake or
stream or ocean when it was possible to do so.

For a long time Kala could not accustom herself to the sight; for
though her people could swim when forced to it, they did not like to
enter water, and never did so voluntarily.

The adventure with the lioness gave Tarzan food for pleasurable
memories, for it was such affairs which broke the monotony of his daily
life--otherwise but a dull round of searching for food, eating, and
sleeping.

The tribe to which he belonged roamed a tract extending, roughly,
twenty-five miles along the seacoast and some fifty miles inland.  This
they traversed almost continually, occasionally remaining for months in
one locality; but as they moved through the trees with great speed they
often covered the territory in a very few days.

Much depended upon food supply, climatic conditions, and the prevalence
of animals of the more dangerous species; though Kerchak often led them
on long marches for no other reason than that he had tired of remaining
in the same place.

At night they slept where darkness overtook them, lying upon the
ground, and sometimes covering their heads, and more seldom their
bodies, with the great leaves of the elephant's ear.  Two or three
might lie cuddled in each other's arms for additional warmth if the
night were chill, and thus Tarzan had slept in Kala's arms nightly for
all these years.

That the huge, fierce brute loved this child of another race is beyond
question, and he, too, gave to the great, hairy beast all the affection
that would have belonged to his fair young mother had she lived.

When he was disobedient she cuffed him, it is true, but she was never
cruel to him, and was more often caressing him than chastising him.

Tublat, her mate, always hated Tarzan, and on several occasions had
come near ending his youthful career.

Tarzan on his part never lost an opportunity to show that he fully
reciprocated his foster father's sentiments, and whenever he could
safely annoy him or make faces at him or hurl insults upon him from the
safety of his mother's arms, or the slender branches of the higher
trees, he did so.

His superior intelligence and cunning permitted him to invent a
thousand diabolical tricks to add to the burdens of Tublat's life.

Early in his boyhood he had learned to form ropes by twisting and tying
long grasses together, and with these he was forever tripping Tublat or
attempting to hang him from some overhanging branch.

By constant playing and experimenting with these he learned to tie rude
knots, and make sliding nooses; and with these he and the younger apes
amused themselves.  What Tarzan did they tried to do also, but he alone
originated and became proficient.

One day while playing thus Tarzan had thrown his rope at one of his
fleeing companions, retaining the other end in his grasp.  By accident
the noose fell squarely about the running ape's neck, bringing him to a
sudden and surprising halt.

Ah, here was a new game, a fine game, thought Tarzan, and immediately
he attempted to repeat the trick.  And thus, by painstaking and
continued practice, he learned the art of roping.

Now, indeed, was the life of Tublat a living nightmare.  In sleep, upon
the march, night or day, he never knew when that quiet noose would slip
about his neck and nearly choke the life out of him.

Kala punished, Tublat swore dire vengeance, and old Kerchak took notice
and warned and threatened; but all to no avail.

Tarzan defied them all, and the thin, strong noose continued to settle
about Tublat's neck whenever he least expected it.

The other apes derived unlimited amusement from Tublat's discomfiture,
for Broken Nose was a disagreeable old fellow, whom no one liked,
anyway.

In Tarzan's clever little mind many thoughts revolved, and back of
these was his divine power of reason.

If he could catch his fellow apes with his long arm of many grasses,
why not Sabor, the lioness?

It was the germ of a thought, which, however, was destined to mull
around in his conscious and subconscious mind until it resulted in
magnificent achievement.

But that came in later years.




Chapter VI

Jungle Battles


The wanderings of the tribe brought them often near the closed and
silent cabin by the little land-locked harbor.  To Tarzan this was
always a source of never-ending mystery and pleasure.

He would peek into the curtained windows, or, climbing upon the roof,
peer down the black depths of the chimney in vain endeavor to solve the
unknown wonders that lay within those strong walls.

His child-like imagination pictured wonderful creatures within, and the
very impossibility of forcing entrance added a thousandfold to his
desire to do so.

He could clamber about the roof and windows for hours attempting to
discover means of ingress, but to the door he paid little attention,
for this was apparently as solid as the walls.

It was in the next visit to the vicinity, following the adventure with
old Sabor, that, as he approached the cabin, Tarzan noticed that from a
distance the door appeared to be an independent part of the wall in
which it was set, and for the first time it occurred to him that this
might prove the means of entrance which had so long eluded him.

He was alone, as was often the case when he visited the cabin, for the
apes had no love for it; the story of the thunder-stick having lost
nothing in the telling during these ten years had quite surrounded the
white man's deserted abode with an atmosphere of weirdness and terror
for the simians.

The story of his own connection with the cabin had never been told him.
The language of the apes had so few words that they could talk but
little of what they had seen in the cabin, having no words to
accurately describe either the strange people or their belongings, and
so, long before Tarzan was old enough to understand, the subject had
been forgotten by the tribe.

Only in a dim, vague way had Kala explained to him that his father had
been a strange white ape, but he did not know that Kala was not his own
mother.

On this day, then, he went directly to the door and spent hours
examining it and fussing with the hinges, the knob and the latch.
Finally he stumbled upon the right combination, and the door swung
creakingly open before his astonished eyes.

For some minutes he did not dare venture within, but finally, as his
eyes became accustomed to the dim light of the interior he slowly and
cautiously entered.

In the middle of the floor lay a skeleton, every vestige of flesh gone
from the bones to which still clung the mildewed and moldered remnants
of what had once been clothing.  Upon the bed lay a similar gruesome
thing, but smaller, while in a tiny cradle near-by was a third, a wee
mite of a skeleton.

To none of these evidences of a fearful tragedy of a long dead day did
little Tarzan give but passing heed.  His wild jungle life had inured
him to the sight of dead and dying animals, and had he known that he
was looking upon the remains of his own father and mother he would have
been no more greatly moved.

The furnishings and other contents of the room it was which riveted his
attention.  He examined many things minutely--strange tools and
weapons, books, paper, clothing--what little had withstood the ravages
of time in the humid atmosphere of the jungle coast.

He opened chests and cupboards, such as did not baffle his small
experience, and in these he found the contents much better preserved.

Among other things he found a sharp hunting knife, on the keen blade of
which he immediately proceeded to cut his finger.  Undaunted he
continued his experiments, finding that he could hack and hew splinters
of wood from the table and chairs with this new toy.

For a long time this amused him, but finally tiring he continued his
explorations.  In a cupboard filled with books he came across one with
brightly colored pictures--it was a child's illustrated alphabet--

              A is for Archer
              Who shoots with a bow.
              B is for Boy,
              His first name is Joe.


The pictures interested him greatly.

There were many apes with faces similar to his own, and further over in
the book he found, under "M," some little monkeys such as he saw daily
flitting through the trees of his primeval forest.  But nowhere was
pictured any of his own people; in all the book was none that resembled
Kerchak, or Tublat, or Kala.

At first he tried to pick the little figures from the leaves, but he
soon saw that they were not real, though he knew not what they might
be, nor had he any words to describe them.

The boats, and trains, and cows and horses were quite meaningless to
him, but not quite so baffling as the odd little figures which appeared
beneath and between the colored pictures--some strange kind of bug he
thought they might be, for many of them had legs though nowhere could
he find one with eyes and a mouth.  It was his first introduction to
the letters of the alphabet, and he was over ten years old.

Of course he had never before seen print, or ever had spoken with any
living thing which had the remotest idea that such a thing as a written
language existed, nor ever had he seen anyone reading.

So what wonder that the little boy was quite at a loss to guess the
meaning of these strange figures.

Near the middle of the book he found his old enemy, Sabor, the lioness,
and further on, coiled Histah, the snake.

Oh, it was most engrossing!  Never before in all his ten years had he
enjoyed anything so much.  So absorbed was he that he did not note the
approaching dusk, until it was quite upon him and the figures were
blurred.

He put the book back in the cupboard and closed the door, for he did
not wish anyone else to find and destroy his treasure, and as he went
out into the gathering darkness he closed the great door of the cabin
behind him as it had been before he discovered the secret of its lock,
but before he left he had noticed the hunting knife lying where he had
thrown it upon the floor, and this he picked up and took with him to
show to his fellows.

He had taken scarce a dozen steps toward the jungle when a great form
rose up before him from the shadows of a low bush.  At first he thought
it was one of his own people but in another instant he realized that it
was Bolgani, the huge gorilla.

So close was he that there was no chance for flight and little Tarzan
knew that he must stand and fight for his life; for these great beasts
were the deadly enemies of his tribe, and neither one nor the other
ever asked or gave quarter.

Had Tarzan been a full-grown bull ape of the species of his tribe he
would have been more than a match for the gorilla, but being only a
little English boy, though enormously muscular for such, he stood no
chance against his cruel antagonist.  In his veins, though, flowed the
blood of the best of a race of mighty fighters, and back of this was
the training of his short lifetime among the fierce brutes of the
jungle.

He knew no fear, as we know it; his little heart beat the faster but
from the excitement and exhilaration of adventure.  Had the opportunity
presented itself he would have escaped, but solely because his judgment
told him he was no match for the great thing which confronted him.  And
since reason showed him that successful flight was impossible he met
the gorilla squarely and bravely without a tremor of a single muscle,
or any sign of panic.

In fact he met the brute midway in its charge, striking its huge body
with his closed fists and as futilely as he had been a fly attacking an
elephant.  But in one hand he still clutched the knife he had found in
the cabin of his father, and as the brute, striking and biting, closed
upon him the boy accidentally turned the point toward the hairy breast.
As the knife sank deep into its body the gorilla shrieked in pain and
rage.

But the boy had learned in that brief second a use for his sharp and
shining toy, so that, as the tearing, striking beast dragged him to
earth he plunged the blade repeatedly and to the hilt into its breast.

The gorilla, fighting after the manner of its kind, struck terrific
blows with its open hand, and tore the flesh at the boy's throat and
chest with its mighty tusks.

For a moment they rolled upon the ground in the fierce frenzy of
combat.  More and more weakly the torn and bleeding arm struck home
with the long sharp blade, then the little figure stiffened with a
spasmodic jerk, and Tarzan, the young Lord Greystoke, rolled
unconscious upon the dead and decaying vegetation which carpeted his
jungle home.

A mile back in the forest the tribe had heard the fierce challenge of
the gorilla, and, as was his custom when any danger threatened, Kerchak
called his people together, partly for mutual protection against a
common enemy, since this gorilla might be but one of a party of
several, and also to see that all members of the tribe were accounted
for.

It was soon discovered that Tarzan was missing, and Tublat was strongly
opposed to sending assistance.  Kerchak himself had no liking for the
strange little waif, so he listened to Tublat, and, finally, with a
shrug of his shoulders, turned back to the pile of leaves on which he
had made his bed.

But Kala was of a different mind; in fact, she had not waited but to
learn that Tarzan was absent ere she was fairly flying through the
matted branches toward the point from which the cries of the gorilla
were still plainly audible.

Darkness had now fallen, and an early moon was sending its faint light
to cast strange, grotesque shadows among the dense foliage of the
forest.

Here and there the brilliant rays penetrated to earth, but for the most
part they only served to accentuate the Stygian blackness of the
jungle's depths.

Like some huge phantom, Kala swung noiselessly from tree to tree; now
running nimbly along a great branch, now swinging through space at the
end of another, only to grasp that of a farther tree in her rapid
progress toward the scene of the tragedy her knowledge of jungle life
told her was being enacted a short distance before her.

The cries of the gorilla proclaimed that it was in mortal combat with
some other denizen of the fierce wood.  Suddenly these cries ceased,
and the silence of death reigned throughout the jungle.

Kala could not understand, for the voice of Bolgani had at last been
raised in the agony of suffering and death, but no sound had come to
her by which she possibly could determine the nature of his antagonist.

That her little Tarzan could destroy a great bull gorilla she knew to
be improbable, and so, as she neared the spot from which the sounds of
the struggle had come, she moved more warily and at last slowly and
with extreme caution she traversed the lowest branches, peering eagerly
into the moon-splashed blackness for a sign of the combatants.

Presently she came upon them, lying in a little open space full under
the brilliant light of the moon--little Tarzan's torn and bloody form,
and beside it a great bull gorilla, stone dead.

With a low cry Kala rushed to Tarzan's side, and gathering the poor,
blood-covered body to her breast, listened for a sign of life.  Faintly
she heard it--the weak beating of the little heart.

Tenderly she bore him back through the inky jungle to where the tribe
lay, and for many days and nights she sat guard beside him, bringing
him food and water, and brushing the flies and other insects from his
cruel wounds.

Of medicine or surgery the poor thing knew nothing.  She could but lick
the wounds, and thus she kept them cleansed, that healing nature might
the more quickly do her work.

At first Tarzan would eat nothing, but rolled and tossed in a wild
delirium of fever.  All he craved was water, and this she brought him
in the only way she could, bearing it in her own mouth.

No human mother could have shown more unselfish and sacrificing
devotion than did this poor, wild brute for the little orphaned waif
whom fate had thrown into her keeping.

At last the fever abated and the boy commenced to mend.  No word of
complaint passed his tight set lips, though the pain of his wounds was
excruciating.

A portion of his chest was laid bare to the ribs, three of which had
been broken by the mighty blows of the gorilla.  One arm was nearly
severed by the giant fangs, and a great piece had been torn from his
neck, exposing his jugular vein, which the cruel jaws had missed but by
a miracle.

With the stoicism of the brutes who had raised him he endured his
suffering quietly, preferring to crawl away from the others and lie
huddled in some clump of tall grasses rather than to show his misery
before their eyes.

Kala, alone, he was glad to have with him, but now that he was better
she was gone longer at a time, in search of food; for the devoted
animal had scarcely eaten enough to support her own life while Tarzan
had been so low, and was in consequence, reduced to a mere shadow of
her former self.




Chapter VII

The Light of Knowledge


After what seemed an eternity to the little sufferer he was able to
walk once more, and from then on his recovery was so rapid that in
another month he was as strong and active as ever.

During his convalescence he had gone over in his mind many times the
battle with the gorilla, and his first thought was to recover the
wonderful little weapon which had transformed him from a hopelessly
outclassed weakling to the superior of the mighty terror of the jungle.

Also, he was anxious to return to the cabin and continue his
investigations of its wondrous contents.

So, early one morning, he set forth alone upon his quest.  After a
little search he located the clean-picked bones of his late adversary,
and close by, partly buried beneath the fallen leaves, he found the
knife, now red with rust from its exposure to the dampness of the
ground and from the dried blood of the gorilla.

He did not like the change in its former bright and gleaming surface;
but it was still a formidable weapon, and one which he meant to use to
advantage whenever the opportunity presented itself.  He had in mind
that no more would he run from the wanton attacks of old Tublat.

In another moment he was at the cabin, and after a short time had again
thrown the latch and entered.  His first concern was to learn the
mechanism of the lock, and this he did by examining it closely while
the door was open, so that he could learn precisely what caused it to
hold the door, and by what means it released at his touch.

He found that he could close and lock the door from within, and this he
did so that there would be no chance of his being molested while at his
investigation.

He commenced a systematic search of the cabin; but his attention was
soon riveted by the books which seemed to exert a strange and powerful
influence over him, so that he could scarce attend to aught else for
the lure of the wondrous puzzle which their purpose presented to him.

Among the other books were a primer, some child's readers, numerous
picture books, and a great dictionary.  All of these he examined, but
the pictures caught his fancy most, though the strange little bugs
which covered the pages where there were no pictures excited his wonder
and deepest thought.

Squatting upon his haunches on the table top in the cabin his father
had built--his smooth, brown, naked little body bent over the book
which rested in his strong slender hands, and his great shock of long,
black hair falling about his well-shaped head and bright, intelligent
eyes--Tarzan of the apes, little primitive man, presented a picture
filled, at once, with pathos and with promise--an allegorical figure of
the primordial groping through the black night of ignorance toward the
light of learning.

His little face was tense in study, for he had partially grasped, in a
hazy, nebulous way, the rudiments of a thought which was destined to
prove the key and the solution to the puzzling problem of the strange
little bugs.

In his hands was a primer opened at a picture of a little ape similar
to himself, but covered, except for hands and face, with strange,
colored fur, for such he thought the jacket and trousers to be.
Beneath the picture were three little bugs--

              BOY.


And now he had discovered in the text upon the page that these three
were repeated many times in the same sequence.

Another fact he learned--that there were comparatively few individual
bugs; but these were repeated many times, occasionally alone, but more
often in company with others.

Slowly he turned the pages, scanning the pictures and the text for a
repetition of the combination B-O-Y.  Presently he found it beneath a
picture of another little ape and a strange animal which went upon four
legs like the jackal and resembled him not a little.  Beneath this
picture the bugs appeared as:

              A BOY AND A DOG


There they were, the three little bugs which always accompanied the
little ape.

And so he progressed very, very slowly, for it was a hard and laborious
task which he had set himself without knowing it--a task which might
seem to you or me impossible--learning to read without having the
slightest knowledge of letters or written language, or the faintest
idea that such things existed.

He did not accomplish it in a day, or in a week, or in a month, or in a
year; but slowly, very slowly, he learned after he had grasped the
possibilities which lay in those little bugs, so that by the time he
was fifteen he knew the various combinations of letters which stood for
every pictured figure in the little primer and in one or two of the
picture books.

Of the meaning and use of the articles and conjunctions, verbs and
adverbs and pronouns he had but the faintest conception.

One day when he was about twelve he found a number of lead pencils in a
hitherto undiscovered drawer beneath the table, and in scratching upon
the table top with one of them he was delighted to discover the black
line it left behind it.

He worked so assiduously with this new toy that the table top was soon
a mass of scrawly loops and irregular lines and his pencil-point worn
down to the wood.  Then he took another pencil, but this time he had a
definite object in view.

He would attempt to reproduce some of the little bugs that scrambled
over the pages of his books.

It was a difficult task, for he held the pencil as one would grasp the
hilt of a dagger, which does not add greatly to ease in writing or to
the legibility of the results.

But he persevered for months, at such times as he was able to come to
the cabin, until at last by repeated experimenting he found a position
in which to hold the pencil that best permitted him to guide and
control it, so that at last he could roughly reproduce any of the
little bugs.

Thus he made a beginning of writing.

Copying the bugs taught him another thing--their number; and though he
could not count as we understand it, yet he had an idea of quantity,
the base of his calculations being the number of fingers upon one of
his hands.

His search through the various books convinced him that he had
discovered all the different kinds of bugs most often repeated in
combination, and these he arranged in proper order with great ease
because of the frequency with which he had perused the fascinating
alphabet picture book.

His education progressed; but his greatest finds were in the
inexhaustible storehouse of the huge illustrated dictionary, for he
learned more through the medium of pictures than text, even after he
had grasped the significance of the bugs.

When he discovered the arrangement of words in alphabetical order he
delighted in searching for and finding the combinations with which he
was familiar, and the words which followed them, their definitions, led
him still further into the mazes of erudition.

By the time he was seventeen he had learned to read the simple, child's
primer and had fully realized the true and wonderful purpose of the
little bugs.

No longer did he feel shame for his hairless body or his human
features, for now his reason told him that he was of a different race
from his wild and hairy companions.  He was a M-A-N, they were A-P-E-S,
and the little apes which scurried through the forest top were
M-O-N-K-E-Y-S.  He knew, too, that old Sabor was a L-I-O-N-E-S-S, and
Histah a S-N-A-K-E, and Tantor an E-L-E-P-H-A-N-T.  And so he learned
to read.  From then on his progress was rapid.  With the help of the
great dictionary and the active intelligence of a healthy mind endowed
by inheritance with more than ordinary reasoning powers he shrewdly
guessed at much which he could not really understand, and more often
than not his guesses were close to the mark of truth.

There were many breaks in his education, caused by the migratory habits
of his tribe, but even when removed from his books his active brain
continued to search out the mysteries of his fascinating avocation.

Pieces of bark and flat leaves and even smooth stretches of bare earth
provided him with copy books whereon to scratch with the point of his
hunting knife the lessons he was learning.

Nor did he neglect the sterner duties of life while following the bent
of his inclination toward the solving of the mystery of his library.

He practiced with his rope and played with his sharp knife, which he
had learned to keep keen by whetting upon flat stones.

The tribe had grown larger since Tarzan had come among them, for under
the leadership of Kerchak they had been able to frighten the other
tribes from their part of the jungle so that they had plenty to eat and
little or no loss from predatory incursions of neighbors.

Hence the younger males as they became adult found it more comfortable
to take mates from their own tribe, or if they captured one of another
tribe to bring her back to Kerchak's band and live in amity with him
rather than attempt to set up new establishments of their own, or fight
with the redoubtable Kerchak for supremacy at home.

Occasionally one more ferocious than his fellows would attempt this
latter alternative, but none had come yet who could wrest the palm of
victory from the fierce and brutal ape.

Tarzan held a peculiar position in the tribe.  They seemed to consider
him one of them and yet in some way different.  The older males either
ignored him entirely or else hated him so vindictively that but for his
wondrous agility and speed and the fierce protection of the huge Kala
he would have been dispatched at an early age.

Tublat was his most consistent enemy, but it was through Tublat that,
when he was about thirteen, the persecution of his enemies suddenly
ceased and he was left severely alone, except on the occasions when one
of them ran amuck in the throes of one of those strange, wild fits of
insane rage which attacks the males of many of the fiercer animals of
the jungle.  Then none was safe.

On the day that Tarzan established his right to respect, the tribe was
gathered about a small natural amphitheater which the jungle had left
free from its entangling vines and creepers in a hollow among some low
hills.

The open space was almost circular in shape.  Upon every hand rose the
mighty giants of the untouched forest, with the matted undergrowth
banked so closely between the huge trunks that the only opening into
the little, level arena was through the upper branches of the trees.

Here, safe from interruption, the tribe often gathered.  In the center
of the amphitheater was one of those strange earthen drums which the
anthropoids build for the queer rites the sounds of which men have
heard in the fastnesses of the jungle, but which none has ever
witnessed.

Many travelers have seen the drums of the great apes, and some have
heard the sounds of their beating and the noise of the wild, weird
revelry of these first lords of the jungle, but Tarzan, Lord Greystoke,
is, doubtless, the only human being who ever joined in the fierce, mad,
intoxicating revel of the Dum-Dum.

From this primitive function has arisen, unquestionably, all the forms
and ceremonials of modern church and state, for through all the
countless ages, back beyond the uttermost ramparts of a dawning
humanity our fierce, hairy forebears danced out the rites of the
Dum-Dum to the sound of their earthen drums, beneath the bright light
of a tropical moon in the depth of a mighty jungle which stands
unchanged today as it stood on that long forgotten night in the dim,
unthinkable vistas of the long dead past when our first shaggy ancestor
swung from a swaying bough and dropped lightly upon the soft turf of
the first meeting place.

On the day that Tarzan won his emancipation from the persecution that
had followed him remorselessly for twelve of his thirteen years of
life, the tribe, now a full hundred strong, trooped silently through
the lower terrace of the jungle trees and dropped noiselessly upon the
floor of the amphitheater.

The rites of the Dum-Dum marked important events in the life of the
tribe--a victory, the capture of a prisoner, the killing of some large
fierce denizen of the jungle, the death or accession of a king, and
were conducted with set ceremonialism.

Today it was the killing of a giant ape, a member of another tribe, and
as the people of Kerchak entered the arena two mighty bulls were seen
bearing the body of the vanquished between them.

They laid their burden before the earthen drum and then squatted there
beside it as guards, while the other members of the community curled
themselves in grassy nooks to sleep until the rising moon should give
the signal for the commencement of their savage orgy.

For hours absolute quiet reigned in the little clearing, except as it
was broken by the discordant notes of brilliantly feathered parrots, or
the screeching and twittering of the thousand jungle birds flitting
ceaselessly amongst the vivid orchids and flamboyant blossoms which
festooned the myriad, moss-covered branches of the forest kings.

At length as darkness settled upon the jungle the apes commenced to
bestir themselves, and soon they formed a great circle about the
earthen drum.  The females and young squatted in a thin line at the
outer periphery of the circle, while just in front of them ranged the
adult males.  Before the drum sat three old females, each armed with a
knotted branch fifteen or eighteen inches in length.

Slowly and softly they began tapping upon the resounding surface of the
drum as the first faint rays of the ascending moon silvered the
encircling tree tops.

As the light in the amphitheater increased the females augmented the
frequency and force of their blows until presently a wild, rhythmic din
pervaded the great jungle for miles in every direction.  Huge, fierce
brutes stopped in their hunting, with up-pricked ears and raised heads,
to listen to the dull booming that betokened the Dum-Dum of the apes.

Occasionally one would raise his shrill scream or thunderous roar in
answering challenge to the savage din of the anthropoids, but none came
near to investigate or attack, for the great apes, assembled in all the
power of their numbers, filled the breasts of their jungle neighbors
with deep respect.

As the din of the drum rose to almost deafening volume Kerchak sprang
into the open space between the squatting males and the drummers.

Standing erect he threw his head far back and looking full into the eye
of the rising moon he beat upon his breast with his great hairy paws
and emitted his fearful roaring shriek.

One--twice--thrice that terrifying cry rang out across the teeming
solitude of that unspeakably quick, yet unthinkably dead, world.

Then, crouching, Kerchak slunk noiselessly around the open circle,
veering far away from the dead body lying before the altar-drum, but,
as he passed, keeping his little, fierce, wicked, red eyes upon the
corpse.

Another male then sprang into the arena, and, repeating the horrid
cries of his king, followed stealthily in his wake.  Another and
another followed in quick succession until the jungle reverberated with
the now almost ceaseless notes of their bloodthirsty screams.

It was the challenge and the hunt.

When all the adult males had joined in the thin line of circling
dancers the attack commenced.

Kerchak, seizing a huge club from the pile which lay at hand for the
purpose, rushed furiously upon the dead ape, dealing the corpse a
terrific blow, at the same time emitting the growls and snarls of
combat.  The din of the drum was now increased, as well as the
frequency of the blows, and the warriors, as each approached the victim
of the hunt and delivered his bludgeon blow, joined in the mad whirl of
the Death Dance.

Tarzan was one of the wild, leaping horde.  His brown, sweat-streaked,
muscular body, glistening in the moonlight, shone supple and graceful
among the uncouth, awkward, hairy brutes about him.

None was more stealthy in the mimic hunt, none more ferocious than he
in the wild ferocity of the attack, none who leaped so high into the
air in the Dance of Death.

As the noise and rapidity of the drumbeats increased the dancers
apparently became intoxicated with the wild rhythm and the savage
yells.  Their leaps and bounds increased, their bared fangs dripped
saliva, and their lips and breasts were flecked with foam.

For half an hour the weird dance went on, until, at a sign from
Kerchak, the noise of the drums ceased, the female drummers scampering
hurriedly through the line of dancers toward the outer rim of squatting
spectators.  Then, as one, the males rushed headlong upon the thing
which their terrific blows had reduced to a mass of hairy pulp.

Flesh seldom came to their jaws in satisfying quantities, so a fit
finale to their wild revel was a taste of fresh killed meat, and it was
to the purpose of devouring their late enemy that they now turned their
attention.

Great fangs sunk into the carcass tearing away huge hunks, the
mightiest of the apes obtaining the choicest morsels, while the weaker
circled the outer edge of the fighting, snarling pack awaiting their
chance to dodge in and snatch a dropped tidbit or filch a remaining
bone before all was gone.

Tarzan, more than the apes, craved and needed flesh.  Descended from a
race of meat eaters, never in his life, he thought, had he once
satisfied his appetite for animal food; and so now his agile little
body wormed its way far into the mass of struggling, rending apes in an
endeavor to obtain a share which his strength would have been unequal
to the task of winning for him.

At his side hung the hunting knife of his unknown father in a sheath
self-fashioned in copy of one he had seen among the pictures of his
treasure-books.

At last he reached the fast disappearing feast and with his sharp knife
slashed off a more generous portion than he had hoped for, an entire
hairy forearm, where it protruded from beneath the feet of the mighty
Kerchak, who was so busily engaged in perpetuating the royal
prerogative of gluttony that he failed to note the act of LESE-MAJESTE.

So little Tarzan wriggled out from beneath the struggling mass,
clutching his grisly prize close to his breast.

Among those circling futilely the outskirts of the banqueters was old
Tublat.  He had been among the first at the feast, but had retreated
with a goodly share to eat in quiet, and was now forcing his way back
for more.

So it was that he spied Tarzan as the boy emerged from the clawing,
pushing throng with that hairy forearm hugged firmly to his body.

Tublat's little, close-set, bloodshot, pig-eyes shot wicked gleams of
hate as they fell upon the object of his loathing.  In them, too, was
greed for the toothsome dainty the boy carried.

But Tarzan saw his arch enemy as quickly, and divining what the great
beast would do he leaped nimbly away toward the females and the young,
hoping to hide himself among them.  Tublat, however, was close upon his
heels, so that he had no opportunity to seek a place of concealment,
but saw that he would be put to it to escape at all.

Swiftly he sped toward the surrounding trees and with an agile bound
gained a lower limb with one hand, and then, transferring his burden to
his teeth, he climbed rapidly upward, closely followed by Tublat.

Up, up he went to the waving pinnacle of a lofty monarch of the forest
where his heavy pursuer dared not follow him.  There he perched,
hurling taunts and insults at the raging, foaming beast fifty feet
below him.

And then Tublat went mad.

With horrifying screams and roars he rushed to the ground, among the
females and young, sinking his great fangs into a dozen tiny necks and
tearing great pieces from the backs and breasts of the females who fell
into his clutches.

In the brilliant moonlight Tarzan witnessed the whole mad carnival of
rage.  He saw the females and the young scamper to the safety of the
trees.  Then the great bulls in the center of the arena felt the mighty
fangs of their demented fellow, and with one accord they melted into
the black shadows of the overhanging forest.

There was but one in the amphitheater beside Tublat, a belated female
running swiftly toward the tree where Tarzan perched, and close behind
her came the awful Tublat.

It was Kala, and as quickly as Tarzan saw that Tublat was gaining on
her he dropped with the rapidity of a falling stone, from branch to
branch, toward his foster mother.

Now she was beneath the overhanging limbs and close above her crouched
Tarzan, waiting the outcome of the race.

She leaped into the air grasping a low-hanging branch, but almost over
the head of Tublat, so nearly had he distanced her.  She should have
been safe now but there was a rending, tearing sound, the branch broke
and precipitated her full upon the head of Tublat, knocking him to the
ground.

Both were up in an instant, but as quick as they had been Tarzan had
been quicker, so that the infuriated bull found himself facing the
man-child who stood between him and Kala.

Nothing could have suited the fierce beast better, and with a roar of
triumph he leaped upon the little Lord Greystoke.  But his fangs never
closed in that nut brown flesh.

A muscular hand shot out and grasped the hairy throat, and another
plunged a keen hunting knife a dozen times into the broad breast.  Like
lightning the blows fell, and only ceased when Tarzan felt the limp
form crumple beneath him.

As the body rolled to the ground Tarzan of the Apes placed his foot
upon the neck of his lifelong enemy and, raising his eyes to the full
moon, threw back his fierce young head and voiced the wild and terrible
cry of his people.

One by one the tribe swung down from their arboreal retreats and formed
a circle about Tarzan and his vanquished foe.  When they had all come
Tarzan turned toward them.

"I am Tarzan," he cried.  "I am a great killer.  Let all respect Tarzan
of the Apes and Kala, his mother.  There be none among you as mighty as
Tarzan.  Let his enemies beware."

Looking full into the wicked, red eyes of Kerchak, the young Lord
Greystoke beat upon his mighty breast and screamed out once more his
shrill cry of defiance.




Chapter VIII

The Tree-top Hunter


The morning after the Dum-Dum the tribe started slowly back through the
forest toward the coast.

The body of Tublat lay where it had fallen, for the people of Kerchak
do not eat their own dead.

The march was but a leisurely search for food.  Cabbage palm and gray
plum, pisang and scitamine they found in abundance, with wild
pineapple, and occasionally small mammals, birds, eggs, reptiles, and
insects.  The nuts they cracked between their powerful jaws, or, if too
hard, broke by pounding between stones.

Once old Sabor, crossing their path, sent them scurrying to the safety
of the higher branches, for if she respected their number and their
sharp fangs, they on their part held her cruel and mighty ferocity in
equal esteem.

Upon a low-hanging branch sat Tarzan directly above the majestic,
supple body as it forged silently through the thick jungle.  He hurled
a pineapple at the ancient enemy of his people.  The great beast
stopped and, turning, eyed the taunting figure above her.

With an angry lash of her tail she bared her yellow fangs, curling her
great lips in a hideous snarl that wrinkled her bristling snout in
serried ridges and closed her wicked eyes to two narrow slits of rage
and hatred.

With back-laid ears she looked straight into the eyes of Tarzan of the
Apes and sounded her fierce, shrill challenge.  And from the safety of
his overhanging limb the ape-child sent back the fearsome answer of his
kind.

For a moment the two eyed each other in silence, and then the great cat
turned into the jungle, which swallowed her as the ocean engulfs a
tossed pebble.

But into the mind of Tarzan a great plan sprang.  He had killed the
fierce Tublat, so was he not therefore a mighty fighter?  Now would he
track down the crafty Sabor and slay her likewise.  He would be a
mighty hunter, also.

At the bottom of his little English heart beat the great desire to
cover his nakedness with CLOTHES for he had learned from his picture
books that all MEN were so covered, while MONKEYS and APES and every
other living thing went naked.

CLOTHES therefore, must be truly a badge of greatness; the insignia of
the superiority of MAN over all other animals, for surely there could
be no other reason for wearing the hideous things.

Many moons ago, when he had been much smaller, he had desired the skin
of Sabor, the lioness, or Numa, the lion, or Sheeta, the leopard to
cover his hairless body that he might no longer resemble hideous
Histah, the snake; but now he was proud of his sleek skin for it
betokened his descent from a mighty race, and the conflicting desires
to go naked in prideful proof of his ancestry, or to conform to the
customs of his own kind and wear hideous and uncomfortable apparel
found first one and then the other in the ascendency.

As the tribe continued their slow way through the forest after the
passing of Sabor, Tarzan's head was filled with his great scheme for
slaying his enemy, and for many days thereafter he thought of little
else.

On this day, however, he presently had other and more immediate
interests to attract his attention.

Suddenly it became as midnight; the noises of the jungle ceased; the
trees stood motionless as though in paralyzed expectancy of some great
and imminent disaster.  All nature waited--but not for long.

Faintly, from a distance, came a low, sad moaning.  Nearer and nearer
it approached, mounting louder and louder in volume.

The great trees bent in unison as though pressed earthward by a mighty
hand.  Farther and farther toward the ground they inclined, and still
there was no sound save the deep and awesome moaning of the wind.

Then, suddenly, the jungle giants whipped back, lashing their mighty
tops in angry and deafening protest.  A vivid and blinding light
flashed from the whirling, inky clouds above.  The deep cannonade of
roaring thunder belched forth its fearsome challenge.  The deluge
came--all hell broke loose upon the jungle.

The tribe shivering from the cold rain, huddled at the bases of great
trees.  The lightning, darting and flashing through the blackness,
showed wildly waving branches, whipping streamers and bending trunks.

Now and again some ancient patriarch of the woods, rent by a flashing
bolt, would crash in a thousand pieces among the surrounding trees,
carrying down numberless branches and many smaller neighbors to add to
the tangled confusion of the tropical jungle.

Branches, great and small, torn away by the ferocity of the tornado,
hurtled through the wildly waving verdure, carrying death and
destruction to countless unhappy denizens of the thickly peopled world
below.

For hours the fury of the storm continued without surcease, and still
the tribe huddled close in shivering fear.  In constant danger from
falling trunks and branches and paralyzed by the vivid flashing of
lightning and the bellowing of thunder they crouched in pitiful misery
until the storm passed.

The end was as sudden as the beginning.  The wind ceased, the sun shone
forth--nature smiled once more.

The dripping leaves and branches, and the moist petals of gorgeous
flowers glistened in the splendor of the returning day.  And, so--as
Nature forgot, her children forgot also.  Busy life went on as it had
been before the darkness and the fright.

But to Tarzan a dawning light had come to explain the mystery of
CLOTHES.  How snug he would have been beneath the heavy coat of Sabor!
And so was added a further incentive to the adventure.

For several months the tribe hovered near the beach where stood
Tarzan's cabin, and his studies took up the greater portion of his
time, but always when journeying through the forest he kept his rope in
readiness, and many were the smaller animals that fell into the snare
of the quick thrown noose.

Once it fell about the short neck of Horta, the boar, and his mad lunge
for freedom toppled Tarzan from the overhanging limb where he had lain
in wait and from whence he had launched his sinuous coil.

The mighty tusker turned at the sound of his falling body, and, seeing
only the easy prey of a young ape, he lowered his head and charged
madly at the surprised youth.

Tarzan, happily, was uninjured by the fall, alighting catlike upon all
fours far outspread to take up the shock.  He was on his feet in an
instant and, leaping with the agility of the monkey he was, he gained
the safety of a low limb as Horta, the boar, rushed futilely beneath.

Thus it was that Tarzan learned by experience the limitations as well
as the possibilities of his strange weapon.

He lost a long rope on this occasion, but he knew that had it been
Sabor who had thus dragged him from his perch the outcome might have
been very different, for he would have lost his life, doubtless, into
the bargain.

It took him many days to braid a new rope, but when, finally, it was
done he went forth purposely to hunt, and lie in wait among the dense
foliage of a great branch right above the well-beaten trail that led to
water.

Several small animals passed unharmed beneath him.  He did not want
such insignificant game.  It would take a strong animal to test the
efficacy of his new scheme.

At last came she whom Tarzan sought, with lithe sinews rolling beneath
shimmering hide; fat and glossy came Sabor, the lioness.

Her great padded feet fell soft and noiseless on the narrow trail.  Her
head was high in ever alert attention; her long tail moved slowly in
sinuous and graceful undulations.

Nearer and nearer she came to where Tarzan of the Apes crouched upon
his limb, the coils of his long rope poised ready in his hand.

Like a thing of bronze, motionless as death, sat Tarzan.  Sabor passed
beneath.  One stride beyond she took--a second, a third, and then the
silent coil shot out above her.

For an instant the spreading noose hung above her head like a great
snake, and then, as she looked upward to detect the origin of the
swishing sound of the rope, it settled about her neck.  With a quick
jerk Tarzan snapped the noose tight about the glossy throat, and then
he dropped the rope and clung to his support with both hands.

Sabor was trapped.

With a bound the startled beast turned into the jungle, but Tarzan was
not to lose another rope through the same cause as the first.  He had
learned from experience.  The lioness had taken but half her second
bound when she felt the rope tighten about her neck; her body turned
completely over in the air and she fell with a heavy crash upon her
back.  Tarzan had fastened the end of the rope securely to the trunk of
the great tree on which he sat.

Thus far his plan had worked to perfection, but when he grasped the
rope, bracing himself behind a crotch of two mighty branches, he found
that dragging the mighty, struggling, clawing, biting, screaming mass
of iron-muscled fury up to the tree and hanging her was a very
different proposition.

The weight of old Sabor was immense, and when she braced her huge paws
nothing less than Tantor, the elephant, himself, could have budged her.

The lioness was now back in the path where she could see the author of
the indignity which had been placed upon her.  Screaming with rage she
suddenly charged, leaping high into the air toward Tarzan, but when her
huge body struck the limb on which Tarzan had been, Tarzan was no
longer there.

Instead he perched lightly upon a smaller branch twenty feet above the
raging captive.  For a moment Sabor hung half across the branch, while
Tarzan mocked, and hurled twigs and branches at her unprotected face.

Presently the beast dropped to the earth again and Tarzan came quickly
to seize the rope, but Sabor had now found that it was only a slender
cord that held her, and grasping it in her huge jaws severed it before
Tarzan could tighten the strangling noose a second time.

Tarzan was much hurt.  His well-laid plan had come to naught, so he sat
there screaming at the roaring creature beneath him and making mocking
grimaces at it.

Sabor paced back and forth beneath the tree for hours; four times she
crouched and sprang at the dancing sprite above her, but might as well
have clutched at the illusive wind that murmured through the tree tops.

At last Tarzan tired of the sport, and with a parting roar of challenge
and a well-aimed ripe fruit that spread soft and sticky over the
snarling face of his enemy, he swung rapidly through the trees, a
hundred feet above the ground, and in a short time was among the
members of his tribe.

Here he recounted the details of his adventure, with swelling chest and
so considerable swagger that he quite impressed even his bitterest
enemies, while Kala fairly danced for joy and pride.




Chapter IX

Man and Man


Tarzan of the Apes lived on in his wild, jungle existence with little
change for several years, only that he grew stronger and wiser, and
learned from his books more and more of the strange worlds which lay
somewhere outside his primeval forest.

To him life was never monotonous or stale.  There was always Pisah, the
fish, to be caught in the many streams and the little lakes, and Sabor,
with her ferocious cousins to keep one ever on the alert and give zest
to every instant that one spent upon the ground.

Often they hunted him, and more often he hunted them, but though they
never quite reached him with those cruel, sharp claws of theirs, yet
there were times when one could scarce have passed a thick leaf between
their talons and his smooth hide.

Quick was Sabor, the lioness, and quick were Numa and Sheeta, but
Tarzan of the Apes was lightning.

With Tantor, the elephant, he made friends.  How?  Ask not.  But this
is known to the denizens of the jungle, that on many moonlight nights
Tarzan of the Apes and Tantor, the elephant, walked together, and where
the way was clear Tarzan rode, perched high upon Tantor's mighty back.

Many days during these years he spent in the cabin of his father, where
still lay, untouched, the bones of his parents and the skeleton of
Kala's baby.  At eighteen he read fluently and understood nearly all he
read in the many and varied volumes on the shelves.

Also could he write, with printed letters, rapidly and plainly, but
script he had not mastered, for though there were several copy books
among his treasure, there was so little written English in the cabin
that he saw no use for bothering with this other form of writing,
though he could read it, laboriously.

Thus, at eighteen, we find him, an English lordling, who could speak no
English, and yet who could read and write his native language.  Never
had he seen a human being other than himself, for the little area
traversed by his tribe was watered by no greater river to bring down
the savage natives of the interior.

High hills shut it off on three sides, the ocean on the fourth.  It was
alive with lions and leopards and poisonous snakes.  Its untouched
mazes of matted jungle had as yet invited no hardy pioneer from the
human beasts beyond its frontier.

But as Tarzan of the Apes sat one day in the cabin of his father
delving into the mysteries of a new book, the ancient security of his
jungle was broken forever.

At the far eastern confine a strange cavalcade strung, in single file,
over the brow of a low hill.

In advance were fifty black warriors armed with slender wooden spears
with ends hard baked over slow fires, and long bows and poisoned
arrows.  On their backs were oval shields, in their noses huge rings,
while from the kinky wool of their heads protruded tufts of gay
feathers.

Across their foreheads were tattooed three parallel lines of color, and
on each breast three concentric circles.  Their yellow teeth were filed
to sharp points, and their great protruding lips added still further to
the low and bestial brutishness of their appearance.

Following them were several hundred women and children, the former
bearing upon their heads great burdens of cooking pots, household
utensils and ivory.  In the rear were a hundred warriors, similar in
all respects to the advance guard.

That they more greatly feared an attack from the rear than whatever
unknown enemies lurked in their advance was evidenced by the formation
of the column; and such was the fact, for they were fleeing from the
white man's soldiers who had so harassed them for rubber and ivory that
they had turned upon their conquerors one day and massacred a white
officer and a small detachment of his black troops.

For many days they had gorged themselves on meat, but eventually a
stronger body of troops had come and fallen upon their village by night
to revenge the death of their comrades.

That night the black soldiers of the white man had had meat a-plenty,
and this little remnant of a once powerful tribe had slunk off into the
gloomy jungle toward the unknown, and freedom.

But that which meant freedom and the pursuit of happiness to these
savage blacks meant consternation and death to many of the wild
denizens of their new home.

For three days the little cavalcade marched slowly through the heart of
this unknown and untracked forest, until finally, early in the fourth
day, they came upon a little spot near the banks of a small river,
which seemed less thickly overgrown than any ground they had yet
encountered.

Here they set to work to build a new village, and in a month a great
clearing had been made, huts and palisades erected, plantains, yams and
maize planted, and they had taken up their old life in their new home.
Here there were no white men, no soldiers, nor any rubber or ivory to
be gathered for cruel and thankless taskmasters.

Several moons passed by ere the blacks ventured far into the territory
surrounding their new village.  Several had already fallen prey to old
Sabor, and because the jungle was so infested with these fierce and
bloodthirsty cats, and with lions and leopards, the ebony warriors
hesitated to trust themselves far from the safety of their palisades.

But one day, Kulonga, a son of the old king, Mbonga, wandered far into
the dense mazes to the west.  Warily he stepped, his slender lance ever
ready, his long oval shield firmly grasped in his left hand close to
his sleek ebony body.

At his back his bow, and in the quiver upon his shield many slim,
straight arrows, well smeared with the thick, dark, tarry substance
that rendered deadly their tiniest needle prick.

Night found Kulonga far from the palisades of his father's village, but
still headed westward, and climbing into the fork of a great tree he
fashioned a rude platform and curled himself for sleep.

Three miles to the west slept the tribe of Kerchak.

Early the next morning the apes were astir, moving through the jungle
in search of food.  Tarzan, as was his custom, prosecuted his search in
the direction of the cabin so that by leisurely hunting on the way his
stomach was filled by the time he reached the beach.

The apes scattered by ones, and twos, and threes in all directions, but
ever within sound of a signal of alarm.

Kala had moved slowly along an elephant track toward the east, and was
busily engaged in turning over rotted limbs and logs in search of
succulent bugs and fungi, when the faintest shadow of a strange noise
brought her to startled attention.

For fifty yards before her the trail was straight, and down this leafy
tunnel she saw the stealthy advancing figure of a strange and fearful
creature.

It was Kulonga.

Kala did not wait to see more, but, turning, moved rapidly back along
the trail.  She did not run; but, after the manner of her kind when not
aroused, sought rather to avoid than to escape.

Close after her came Kulonga.  Here was meat.  He could make a killing
and feast well this day.  On he hurried, his spear poised for the throw.

At a turning of the trail he came in sight of her again upon another
straight stretch.  His spear hand went far back, the muscles rolled,
lightning-like, beneath the sleek hide.  Out shot the arm, and the
spear sped toward Kala.

A poor cast.  It but grazed her side.

With a cry of rage and pain the she-ape turned upon her tormentor.  In
an instant the trees were crashing beneath the weight of her hurrying
fellows, swinging rapidly toward the scene of trouble in answer to
Kala's scream.

As she charged, Kulonga unslung his bow and fitted an arrow with almost
unthinkable quickness.  Drawing the shaft far back he drove the
poisoned missile straight into the heart of the great anthropoid.

With a horrid scream Kala plunged forward upon her face before the
astonished members of her tribe.

Roaring and shrieking the apes dashed toward Kulonga, but that wary
savage was fleeing down the trail like a frightened antelope.

He knew something of the ferocity of these wild, hairy men, and his one
desire was to put as many miles between himself and them as he possibly
could.

They followed him, racing through the trees, for a long distance, but
finally one by one they abandoned the chase and returned to the scene
of the tragedy.

None of them had ever seen a man before, other than Tarzan, and so they
wondered vaguely what strange manner of creature it might be that had
invaded their jungle.

On the far beach by the little cabin Tarzan heard the faint echoes of
the conflict and knowing that something was seriously amiss among the
tribe he hastened rapidly toward the direction of the sound.

When he arrived he found the entire tribe gathered jabbering about the
dead body of his slain mother.

Tarzan's grief and anger were unbounded.  He roared out his hideous
challenge time and again.  He beat upon his great chest with his
clenched fists, and then he fell upon the body of Kala and sobbed out
the pitiful sorrowing of his lonely heart.

To lose the only creature in all his world who ever had manifested love
and affection for him was the greatest tragedy he had ever known.

What though Kala was a fierce and hideous ape!  To Tarzan she had been
kind, she had been beautiful.

Upon her he had lavished, unknown to himself, all the reverence and
respect and love that a normal English boy feels for his own mother.
He had never known another, and so to Kala was given, though mutely,
all that would have belonged to the fair and lovely Lady Alice had she
lived.

After the first outburst of grief Tarzan controlled himself, and
questioning the members of the tribe who had witnessed the killing of
Kala he learned all that their meager vocabulary could convey.

It was enough, however, for his needs.  It told him of a strange,
hairless, black ape with feathers growing upon its head, who launched
death from a slender branch, and then ran, with the fleetness of Bara,
the deer, toward the rising sun.

Tarzan waited no longer, but leaping into the branches of the trees
sped rapidly through the forest.  He knew the windings of the elephant
trail along which Kala's murderer had flown, and so he cut straight
through the jungle to intercept the black warrior who was evidently
following the tortuous detours of the trail.

At his side was the hunting knife of his unknown sire, and across his
shoulders the coils of his own long rope.  In an hour he struck the
trail again, and coming to earth examined the soil minutely.

In the soft mud on the bank of a tiny rivulet he found footprints such
as he alone in all the jungle had ever made, but much larger than his.
His heart beat fast.  Could it be that he was trailing a MAN--one of
his own race?

There were two sets of imprints pointing in opposite directions.  So
his quarry had already passed on his return along the trail.  As he
examined the newer spoor a tiny particle of earth toppled from the
outer edge of one of the footprints to the bottom of its shallow
depression--ah, the trail was very fresh, his prey must have but
scarcely passed.

Tarzan swung himself to the trees once more, and with swift
noiselessness sped along high above the trail.

He had covered barely a mile when he came upon the black warrior
standing in a little open space.  In his hand was his slender bow to
which he had fitted one of his death dealing arrows.

Opposite him across the little clearing stood Horta, the boar, with
lowered head and foam flecked tusks, ready to charge.

Tarzan looked with wonder upon the strange creature beneath him--so
like him in form and yet so different in face and color.  His books had
portrayed the NEGRO, but how different had been the dull, dead print to
this sleek thing of ebony, pulsing with life.

As the man stood there with taut drawn bow Tarzan recognized him not so
much the NEGRO as the ARCHER of his picture book--

              A stands for Archer


How wonderful!  Tarzan almost betrayed his presence in the deep
excitement of his discovery.

But things were commencing to happen below him.  The sinewy black arm
had drawn the shaft far back; Horta, the boar, was charging, and then
the black released the little poisoned arrow, and Tarzan saw it fly
with the quickness of thought and lodge in the bristling neck of the
boar.

Scarcely had the shaft left his bow ere Kulonga had fitted another to
it, but Horta, the boar, was upon him so quickly that he had no time to
discharge it.  With a bound the black leaped entirely over the rushing
beast and turning with incredible swiftness planted a second arrow in
Horta's back.

Then Kulonga sprang into a near-by tree.

Horta wheeled to charge his enemy once more; a dozen steps he took,
then he staggered and fell upon his side.  For a moment his muscles
stiffened and relaxed convulsively, then he lay still.

Kulonga came down from his tree.

With a knife that hung at his side he cut several large pieces from the
boar's body, and in the center of the trail he built a fire, cooking
and eating as much as he wanted.  The rest he left where it had fallen.

Tarzan was an interested spectator.  His desire to kill burned fiercely
in his wild breast, but his desire to learn was even greater.  He would
follow this savage creature for a while and know from whence he came.
He could kill him at his leisure later, when the bow and deadly arrows
were laid aside.

When Kulonga had finished his repast and disappeared beyond a near
turning of the path, Tarzan dropped quietly to the ground.  With his
knife he severed many strips of meat from Horta's carcass, but he did
not cook them.

He had seen fire, but only when Ara, the lightning, had destroyed some
great tree.  That any creature of the jungle could produce the
red-and-yellow fangs which devoured wood and left nothing but fine dust
surprised Tarzan greatly, and why the black warrior had ruined his
delicious repast by plunging it into the blighting heat was quite
beyond him.  Possibly Ara was a friend with whom the Archer was sharing
his food.

But, be that as it may, Tarzan would not ruin good meat in any such
foolish manner, so he gobbled down a great quantity of the raw flesh,
burying the balance of the carcass beside the trail where he could find
it upon his return.

And then Lord Greystoke wiped his greasy fingers upon his naked thighs
and took up the trail of Kulonga, the son of Mbonga, the king; while in
far-off London another Lord Greystoke, the younger brother of the real
Lord Greystoke's father, sent back his chops to the club's CHEF because
they were underdone, and when he had finished his repast he dipped his
finger-ends into a silver bowl of scented water and dried them upon a
piece of snowy damask.

All day Tarzan followed Kulonga, hovering above him in the trees like
some malign spirit.  Twice more he saw him hurl his arrows of
destruction--once at Dango, the hyena, and again at Manu, the monkey.
In each instance the animal died almost instantly, for Kulonga's poison
was very fresh and very deadly.

Tarzan thought much on this wondrous method of slaying as he swung
slowly along at a safe distance behind his quarry.  He knew that alone
the tiny prick of the arrow could not so quickly dispatch these wild
things of the jungle, who were often torn and scratched and gored in a
frightful manner as they fought with their jungle neighbors, yet as
often recovered as not.

No, there was something mysterious connected with these tiny slivers of
wood which could bring death by a mere scratch.  He must look into the
matter.

That night Kulonga slept in the crotch of a mighty tree and far above
him crouched Tarzan of the Apes.

When Kulonga awoke he found that his bow and arrows had disappeared.
The black warrior was furious and frightened, but more frightened than
furious.  He searched the ground below the tree, and he searched the
tree above the ground; but there was no sign of either bow or arrows or
of the nocturnal marauder.

Kulonga was panic-stricken.  His spear he had hurled at Kala and had
not recovered; and, now that his bow and arrows were gone, he was
defenseless except for a single knife.  His only hope lay in reaching
the village of Mbonga as quickly as his legs would carry him.

That he was not far from home he was certain, so he took the trail at a
rapid trot.

From a great mass of impenetrable foliage a few yards away emerged
Tarzan of the Apes to swing quietly in his wake.

Kulonga's bow and arrows were securely tied high in the top of a giant
tree from which a patch of bark had been removed by a sharp knife near
to the ground, and a branch half cut through and left hanging about
fifty feet higher up.  Thus Tarzan blazed the forest trails and marked
his caches.

As Kulonga continued his journey Tarzan closed on him until he traveled
almost over the black's head.  His rope he now held coiled in his right
hand; he was almost ready for the kill.

The moment was delayed only because Tarzan was anxious to ascertain the
black warrior's destination, and presently he was rewarded, for they
came suddenly in view of a great clearing, at one end of which lay many
strange lairs.

Tarzan was directly over Kulonga, as he made the discovery.  The forest
ended abruptly and beyond lay two hundred yards of planted fields
between the jungle and the village.

Tarzan must act quickly or his prey would be gone; but Tarzan's life
training left so little space between decision and action when an
emergency confronted him that there was not even room for the shadow of
a thought between.

So it was that as Kulonga emerged from the shadow of the jungle a
slender coil of rope sped sinuously above him from the lowest branch of
a mighty tree directly upon the edge of the fields of Mbonga, and ere
the king's son had taken a half dozen steps into the clearing a quick
noose tightened about his neck.

So quickly did Tarzan of the Apes drag back his prey that Kulonga's cry
of alarm was throttled in his windpipe.  Hand over hand Tarzan drew the
struggling black until he had him hanging by his neck in mid-air; then
Tarzan climbed to a larger branch drawing the still threshing victim
well up into the sheltering verdure of the tree.

Here he fastened the rope securely to a stout branch, and then,
descending, plunged his hunting knife into Kulonga's heart.  Kala was
avenged.

Tarzan examined the black minutely, for he had never seen any other
human being.  The knife with its sheath and belt caught his eye; he
appropriated them.  A copper anklet also took his fancy, and this he
transferred to his own leg.

He examined and admired the tattooing on the forehead and breast.  He
marveled at the sharp filed teeth.  He investigated and appropriated
the feathered headdress, and then he prepared to get down to business,
for Tarzan of the Apes was hungry, and here was meat; meat of the kill,
which jungle ethics permitted him to eat.

How may we judge him, by what standards, this ape-man with the heart
and head and body of an English gentleman, and the training of a wild
beast?

Tublat, whom he had hated and who had hated him, he had killed in a
fair fight, and yet never had the thought of eating Tublat's flesh
entered his head.  It would have been as revolting to him as is
cannibalism to us.

But who was Kulonga that he might not be eaten as fairly as Horta, the
boar, or Bara, the deer?  Was he not simply another of the countless
wild things of the jungle who preyed upon one another to satisfy the
cravings of hunger?

Suddenly, a strange doubt stayed his hand.  Had not his books taught
him that he was a man?  And was not The Archer a man, also?

Did men eat men?  Alas, he did not know.  Why, then, this hesitancy!
Once more he essayed the effort, but a qualm of nausea overwhelmed him.
He did not understand.

All he knew was that he could not eat the flesh of this black man, and
thus hereditary instinct, ages old, usurped the functions of his
untaught mind and saved him from transgressing a worldwide law of whose
very existence he was ignorant.

Quickly he lowered Kulonga's body to the ground, removed the noose, and
took to the trees again.




Chapter X

The Fear-Phantom


From a lofty perch Tarzan viewed the village of thatched huts across
the intervening plantation.

He saw that at one point the forest touched the village, and to this
spot he made his way, lured by a fever of curiosity to behold animals
of his own kind, and to learn more of their ways and view the strange
lairs in which they lived.

His savage life among the fierce wild brutes of the jungle left no
opening for any thought that these could be aught else than enemies.
Similarity of form led him into no erroneous conception of the welcome
that would be accorded him should he be discovered by these, the first
of his own kind he had ever seen.

Tarzan of the Apes was no sentimentalist.  He knew nothing of the
brotherhood of man.  All things outside his own tribe were his deadly
enemies, with the few exceptions of which Tantor, the elephant, was a
marked example.

And he realized all this without malice or hatred.  To kill was the law
of the wild world he knew.  Few were his primitive pleasures, but the
greatest of these was to hunt and kill, and so he accorded to others
the right to cherish the same desires as he, even though he himself
might be the object of their hunt.

His strange life had left him neither morose nor bloodthirsty.  That he
joyed in killing, and that he killed with a joyous laugh upon his
handsome lips betokened no innate cruelty.  He killed for food most
often, but, being a man, he sometimes killed for pleasure, a thing
which no other animal does; for it has remained for man alone among all
creatures to kill senselessly and wantonly for the mere pleasure of
inflicting suffering and death.

And when he killed for revenge, or in self-defense, he did that also
without hysteria, for it was a very businesslike proceeding which
admitted of no levity.

So it was that now, as he cautiously approached the village of Mbonga,
he was quite prepared either to kill or be killed should he be
discovered.  He proceeded with unwonted stealth, for Kulonga had taught
him great respect for the little sharp splinters of wood which dealt
death so swiftly and unerringly.

At length he came to a great tree, heavy laden with thick foliage and
loaded with pendant loops of giant creepers.  From this almost
impenetrable bower above the village he crouched, looking down upon the
scene below him, wondering over every feature of this new, strange life.

There were naked children running and playing in the village street.
There were women grinding dried plantain in crude stone mortars, while
others were fashioning cakes from the powdered flour.  Out in the
fields he could see still other women hoeing, weeding, or gathering.

All wore strange protruding girdles of dried grass about their hips and
many were loaded with brass and copper anklets, armlets and bracelets.
Around many a dusky neck hung curiously coiled strands of wire, while
several were further ornamented by huge nose rings.

Tarzan of the Apes looked with growing wonder at these strange
creatures.  Dozing in the shade he saw several men, while at the
extreme outskirts of the clearing he occasionally caught glimpses of
armed warriors apparently guarding the village against surprise from an
attacking enemy.

He noticed that the women alone worked.  Nowhere was there evidence of
a man tilling the fields or performing any of the homely duties of the
village.

Finally his eyes rested upon a woman directly beneath him.

Before her was a small cauldron standing over a low fire and in it
bubbled a thick, reddish, tarry mass.  On one side of her lay a
quantity of wooden arrows the points of which she dipped into the
seething substance, then laying them upon a narrow rack of boughs which
stood upon her other side.

Tarzan of the Apes was fascinated.  Here was the secret of the terrible
destructiveness of The Archer's tiny missiles.  He noted the extreme
care which the woman took that none of the matter should touch her
hands, and once when a particle spattered upon one of her fingers he
saw her plunge the member into a vessel of water and quickly rub the
tiny stain away with a handful of leaves.

Tarzan knew nothing of poison, but his shrewd reasoning told him that
it was this deadly stuff that killed, and not the little arrow, which
was merely the messenger that carried it into the body of its victim.

How he should like to have more of those little death-dealing slivers.
If the woman would only leave her work for an instant he could drop
down, gather up a handful, and be back in the tree again before she
drew three breaths.

As he was trying to think out some plan to distract her attention he
heard a wild cry from across the clearing.  He looked and saw a black
warrior standing beneath the very tree in which he had killed the
murderer of Kala an hour before.

The fellow was shouting and waving his spear above his head.  Now and
again he would point to something on the ground before him.

The village was in an uproar instantly.  Armed men rushed from the
interior of many a hut and raced madly across the clearing toward the
excited sentry.  After them trooped the old men, and the women and
children until, in a moment, the village was deserted.

Tarzan of the Apes knew that they had found the body of his victim, but
that interested him far less than the fact that no one remained in the
village to prevent his taking a supply of the arrows which lay below
him.

Quickly and noiselessly he dropped to the ground beside the cauldron of
poison.  For a moment he stood motionless, his quick, bright eyes
scanning the interior of the palisade.

No one was in sight.  His eyes rested upon the open doorway of a nearby
hut.  He would take a look within, thought Tarzan, and so, cautiously,
he approached the low thatched building.

For a moment he stood without, listening intently.  There was no sound,
and he glided into the semi-darkness of the interior.

Weapons hung against the walls--long spears, strangely shaped knives, a
couple of narrow shields.  In the center of the room was a cooking pot,
and at the far end a litter of dry grasses covered by woven mats which
evidently served the owners as beds and bedding.  Several human skulls
lay upon the floor.

Tarzan of the Apes felt of each article, hefted the spears, smelled of
them, for he "saw" largely through his sensitive and highly trained
nostrils.  He determined to own one of these long, pointed sticks, but
he could not take one on this trip because of the arrows he meant to
carry.

As he took each article from the walls, he placed it in a pile in the
center of the room.  On top of all he placed the cooking pot, inverted,
and on top of this he laid one of the grinning skulls, upon which he
fastened the headdress of the dead Kulonga.

Then he stood back, surveyed his work, and grinned.  Tarzan of the Apes
enjoyed a joke.

But now he heard, outside, the sounds of many voices, and long mournful
howls, and mighty wailing.  He was startled.  Had he remained too long?
Quickly he reached the doorway and peered down the village street
toward the village gate.

The natives were not yet in sight, though he could plainly hear them
approaching across the plantation.  They must be very near.

Like a flash he sprang across the opening to the pile of arrows.
Gathering up all he could carry under one arm, he overturned the
seething cauldron with a kick, and disappeared into the foliage above
just as the first of the returning natives entered the gate at the far
end of the village street.  Then he turned to watch the proceeding
below, poised like some wild bird ready to take swift wing at the first
sign of danger.

The natives filed up the street, four of them bearing the dead body of
Kulonga.  Behind trailed the women, uttering strange cries and weird
lamentation.  On they came to the portals of Kulonga's hut, the very
one in which Tarzan had wrought his depredations.

Scarcely had half a dozen entered the building ere they came rushing
out in wild, jabbering confusion.  The others hastened to gather about.
There was much excited gesticulating, pointing, and chattering; then
several of the warriors approached and peered within.

Finally an old fellow with many ornaments of metal about his arms and
legs, and a necklace of dried human hands depending upon his chest,
entered the hut.

It was Mbonga, the king, father of Kulonga.

For a few moments all was silent.  Then Mbonga emerged, a look of
mingled wrath and superstitious fear writ upon his hideous countenance.
He spoke a few words to the assembled warriors, and in an instant the
men were flying through the little village searching minutely every hut
and corner within the palisades.

Scarcely had the search commenced than the overturned cauldron was
discovered, and with it the theft of the poisoned arrows.  Nothing more
they found, and it was a thoroughly awed and frightened group of
savages which huddled around their king a few moments later.

Mbonga could explain nothing of the strange events that had taken
place.  The finding of the still warm body of Kulonga--on the very
verge of their fields and within easy earshot of the village--knifed
and stripped at the door of his father's home, was in itself
sufficiently mysterious, but these last awesome discoveries within the
village, within the dead Kulonga's own hut, filled their hearts with
dismay, and conjured in their poor brains only the most frightful of
superstitious explanations.

They stood in little groups, talking in low tones, and ever casting
affrighted glances behind them from their great rolling eyes.

Tarzan of the Apes watched them for a while from his lofty perch in the
great tree.  There was much in their demeanor which he could not
understand, for of superstition he was ignorant, and of fear of any
kind he had but a vague conception.

The sun was high in the heavens.  Tarzan had not broken fast this day,
and it was many miles to where lay the toothsome remains of Horta the
boar.

So he turned his back upon the village of Mbonga and melted away into
the leafy fastness of the forest.




Chapter XI

"King of the Apes"


It was not yet dark when he reached the tribe, though he stopped to
exhume and devour the remains of the wild boar he had cached the
preceding day, and again to take Kulonga's bow and arrows from the tree
top in which he had hidden them.

It was a well-laden Tarzan who dropped from the branches into the midst
of the tribe of Kerchak.

With swelling chest he narrated the glories of his adventure and
exhibited the spoils of conquest.

Kerchak grunted and turned away, for he was jealous of this strange
member of his band.  In his little evil brain he sought for some excuse
to wreak his hatred upon Tarzan.

The next day Tarzan was practicing with his bow and arrows at the first
gleam of dawn.  At first he lost nearly every bolt he shot, but finally
he learned to guide the little shafts with fair accuracy, and ere a
month had passed he was no mean shot; but his proficiency had cost him
nearly his entire supply of arrows.

The tribe continued to find the hunting good in the vicinity of the
beach, and so Tarzan of the Apes varied his archery practice with
further investigation of his father's choice though little store of
books.

It was during this period that the young English lord found hidden in
the back of one of the cupboards in the cabin a small metal box.  The
key was in the lock, and a few moments of investigation and
experimentation were rewarded with the successful opening of the
receptacle.

In it he found a faded photograph of a smooth faced young man, a golden
locket studded with diamonds, linked to a small gold chain, a few
letters and a small book.

Tarzan examined these all minutely.

The photograph he liked most of all, for the eyes were smiling, and the
face was open and frank.  It was his father.

The locket, too, took his fancy, and he placed the chain about his neck
in imitation of the ornamentation he had seen to be so common among the
black men he had visited.  The brilliant stones gleamed strangely
against his smooth, brown hide.

The letters he could scarcely decipher for he had learned little or
nothing of script, so he put them back in the box with the photograph
and turned his attention to the book.

This was almost entirely filled with fine script, but while the little
bugs were all familiar to him, their arrangement and the combinations
in which they occurred were strange, and entirely incomprehensible.

Tarzan had long since learned the use of the dictionary, but much to
his sorrow and perplexity it proved of no avail to him in this
emergency.  Not a word of all that was writ in the book could he find,
and so he put it back in the metal box, but with a determination to
work out the mysteries of it later on.

Little did he know that this book held between its covers the key to
his origin--the answer to the strange riddle of his strange life.  It
was the diary of John Clayton, Lord Greystoke--kept in French, as had
always been his custom.

Tarzan replaced the box in the cupboard, but always thereafter he
carried the features of the strong, smiling face of his father in his
heart, and in his head a fixed determination to solve the mystery of
the strange words in the little black book.

At present he had more important business in hand, for his supply of
arrows was exhausted, and he must needs journey to the black men's
village and renew it.

Early the following morning he set out, and, traveling rapidly, he came
before midday to the clearing.  Once more he took up his position in
the great tree, and, as before, he saw the women in the fields and the
village street, and the cauldron of bubbling poison directly beneath
him.

For hours he lay awaiting his opportunity to drop down unseen and
gather up the arrows for which he had come; but nothing now occurred to
call the villagers away from their homes.  The day wore on, and still
Tarzan of the Apes crouched above the unsuspecting woman at the
cauldron.

Presently the workers in the fields returned.  The hunting warriors
emerged from the forest, and when all were within the palisade the
gates were closed and barred.

Many cooking pots were now in evidence about the village.  Before each
hut a woman presided over a boiling stew, while little cakes of
plantain, and cassava puddings were to be seen on every hand.

Suddenly there came a hail from the edge of the clearing.

Tarzan looked.

It was a party of belated hunters returning from the north, and among
them they half led, half carried a struggling animal.

As they approached the village the gates were thrown open to admit
them, and then, as the people saw the victim of the chase, a savage cry
rose to the heavens, for the quarry was a man.

As he was dragged, still resisting, into the village street, the women
and children set upon him with sticks and stones, and Tarzan of the
Apes, young and savage beast of the jungle, wondered at the cruel
brutality of his own kind.

Sheeta, the leopard, alone of all the jungle folk, tortured his prey.
The ethics of all the others meted a quick and merciful death to their
victims.

Tarzan had learned from his books but scattered fragments of the ways
of human beings.

When he had followed Kulonga through the forest he had expected to come
to a city of strange houses on wheels, puffing clouds of black smoke
from a huge tree stuck in the roof of one of them--or to a sea covered
with mighty floating buildings which he had learned were called,
variously, ships and boats and steamers and craft.

He had been sorely disappointed with the poor little village of the
blacks, hidden away in his own jungle, and with not a single house as
large as his own cabin upon the distant beach.

He saw that these people were more wicked than his own apes, and as
savage and cruel as Sabor, herself.  Tarzan began to hold his own kind
in low esteem.

Now they had tied their poor victim to a great post near the center of
the village, directly before Mbonga's hut, and here they formed a
dancing, yelling circle of warriors about him, alive with flashing
knives and menacing spears.

In a larger circle squatted the women, yelling and beating upon drums.
It reminded Tarzan of the Dum-Dum, and so he knew what to expect.  He
wondered if they would spring upon their meat while it was still alive.
The Apes did not do such things as that.

The circle of warriors about the cringing captive drew closer and
closer to their prey as they danced in wild and savage abandon to the
maddening music of the drums.  Presently a spear reached out and
pricked the victim.  It was the signal for fifty others.

Eyes, ears, arms and legs were pierced; every inch of the poor writhing
body that did not cover a vital organ became the target of the cruel
lancers.

The women and children shrieked their delight.

The warriors licked their hideous lips in anticipation of the feast to
come, and vied with one another in the savagery and loathsomeness of
the cruel indignities with which they tortured the still conscious
prisoner.

Then it was that Tarzan of the Apes saw his chance.  All eyes were
fixed upon the thrilling spectacle at the stake.  The light of day had
given place to the darkness of a moonless night, and only the fires in
the immediate vicinity of the orgy had been kept alight to cast a
restless glow upon the restless scene.

Gently the lithe boy dropped to the soft earth at the end of the
village street.  Quickly he gathered up the arrows--all of them this
time, for he had brought a number of long fibers to bind them into a
bundle.

Without haste he wrapped them securely, and then, ere he turned to
leave, the devil of capriciousness entered his heart.  He looked about
for some hint of a wild prank to play upon these strange, grotesque
creatures that they might be again aware of his presence among them.

Dropping his bundle of arrows at the foot of the tree, Tarzan crept
among the shadows at the side of the street until he came to the same
hut he had entered on the occasion of his first visit.

Inside all was darkness, but his groping hands soon found the object
for which he sought, and without further delay he turned again toward
the door.

He had taken but a step, however, ere his quick ear caught the sound of
approaching footsteps immediately without.  In another instant the
figure of a woman darkened the entrance of the hut.

Tarzan drew back silently to the far wall, and his hand sought the
long, keen hunting knife of his father.  The woman came quickly to the
center of the hut.  There she paused for an instant feeling about with
her hands for the thing she sought.  Evidently it was not in its
accustomed place, for she explored ever nearer and nearer the wall
where Tarzan stood.

So close was she now that the ape-man felt the animal warmth of her
naked body.  Up went the hunting knife, and then the woman turned to
one side and soon a guttural "ah" proclaimed that her search had at
last been successful.

Immediately she turned and left the hut, and as she passed through the
doorway Tarzan saw that she carried a cooking pot in her hand.

He followed closely after her, and as he reconnoitered from the shadows
of the doorway he saw that all the women of the village were hastening
to and from the various huts with pots and kettles.  These they were
filling with water and placing over a number of fires near the stake
where the dying victim now hung, an inert and bloody mass of suffering.

Choosing a moment when none seemed near, Tarzan hastened to his bundle
of arrows beneath the great tree at the end of the village street.  As
on the former occasion he overthrew the cauldron before leaping,
sinuous and catlike, into the lower branches of the forest giant.

Silently he climbed to a great height until he found a point where he
could look through a leafy opening upon the scene beneath him.

The women were now preparing the prisoner for their cooking pots, while
the men stood about resting after the fatigue of their mad revel.
Comparative quiet reigned in the village.

Tarzan raised aloft the thing he had pilfered from the hut, and, with
aim made true by years of fruit and coconut throwing, launched it
toward the group of savages.

Squarely among them it fell, striking one of the warriors full upon the
head and felling him to the ground.  Then it rolled among the women and
stopped beside the half-butchered thing they were preparing to feast
upon.

All gazed in consternation at it for an instant, and then, with one
accord, broke and ran for their huts.

It was a grinning human skull which looked up at them from the ground.
The dropping of the thing out of the open sky was a miracle well aimed
to work upon their superstitious fears.

Thus Tarzan of the Apes left them filled with terror at this new
manifestation of the presence of some unseen and unearthly evil power
which lurked in the forest about their village.

Later, when they discovered the overturned cauldron, and that once more
their arrows had been pilfered, it commenced to dawn upon them that
they had offended some great god by placing their village in this part
of the jungle without propitiating him.  From then on an offering of
food was daily placed below the great tree from whence the arrows had
disappeared in an effort to conciliate the mighty one.

But the seed of fear was deep sown, and had he but known it, Tarzan of
the Apes had laid the foundation for much future misery for himself and
his tribe.

That night he slept in the forest not far from the village, and early
the next morning set out slowly on his homeward march, hunting as he
traveled.  Only a few berries and an occasional grub worm rewarded his
search, and he was half famished when, looking up from a log he had
been rooting beneath, he saw Sabor, the lioness, standing in the center
of the trail not twenty paces from him.

The great yellow eyes were fixed upon him with a wicked and baleful
gleam, and the red tongue licked the longing lips as Sabor crouched,
worming her stealthy way with belly flattened against the earth.

Tarzan did not attempt to escape.  He welcomed the opportunity for
which, in fact, he had been searching for days past, now that he was
armed with something more than a rope of grass.

Quickly he unslung his bow and fitted a well-daubed arrow, and as Sabor
sprang, the tiny missile leaped to meet her in mid-air.  At the same
instant Tarzan of the Apes jumped to one side, and as the great cat
struck the ground beyond him another death-tipped arrow sunk deep into
Sabor's loin.

With a mighty roar the beast turned and charged once more, only to be
met with a third arrow full in one eye; but this time she was too close
to the ape-man for the latter to sidestep the onrushing body.

Tarzan of the Apes went down beneath the great body of his enemy, but
with gleaming knife drawn and striking home.  For a moment they lay
there, and then Tarzan realized that the inert mass lying upon him was
beyond power ever again to injure man or ape.

With difficulty he wriggled from beneath the great weight, and as he
stood erect and gazed down upon the trophy of his skill, a mighty wave
of exultation swept over him.

With swelling breast, he placed a foot upon the body of his powerful
enemy, and throwing back his fine young head, roared out the awful
challenge of the victorious bull ape.

The forest echoed to the savage and triumphant paean.  Birds fell
still, and the larger animals and beasts of prey slunk stealthily away,
for few there were of all the jungle who sought for trouble with the
great anthropoids.

And in London another Lord Greystoke was speaking to HIS kind in the
House of Lords, but none trembled at the sound of his soft voice.

Sabor proved unsavory eating even to Tarzan of the Apes, but hunger
served as a most efficacious disguise to toughness and rank taste, and
ere long, with well-filled stomach, the ape-man was ready to sleep
again.  First, however, he must remove the hide, for it was as much for
this as for any other purpose that he had desired to destroy Sabor.

Deftly he removed the great pelt, for he had practiced often on smaller
animals.  When the task was finished he carried his trophy to the fork
of a high tree, and there, curling himself securely in a crotch, he
fell into deep and dreamless slumber.

What with loss of sleep, arduous exercise, and a full belly, Tarzan of
the Apes slept the sun around, awakening about noon of the following
day.  He straightway repaired to the carcass of Sabor, but was angered
to find the bones picked clean by other hungry denizens of the jungle.

Half an hour's leisurely progress through the forest brought to sight a
young deer, and before the little creature knew that an enemy was near
a tiny arrow had lodged in its neck.

So quickly the virus worked that at the end of a dozen leaps the deer
plunged headlong into the undergrowth, dead.  Again did Tarzan feast
well, but this time he did not sleep.

Instead, he hastened on toward the point where he had left the tribe,
and when he had found them proudly exhibited the skin of Sabor, the
lioness.

"Look!" he cried, "Apes of Kerchak.  See what Tarzan, the mighty
killer, has done.  Who else among you has ever killed one of Numa's
people?  Tarzan is mightiest amongst you for Tarzan is no ape.  Tarzan
is--"  But here he stopped, for in the language of the anthropoids
there was no word for man, and Tarzan could only write the word in
English; he could not pronounce it.

The tribe had gathered about to look upon the proof of his wondrous
prowess, and to listen to his words.

Only Kerchak hung back, nursing his hatred and his rage.

Suddenly something snapped in the wicked little brain of the
anthropoid.  With a frightful roar the great beast sprang among the
assemblage.

Biting, and striking with his huge hands, he killed and maimed a dozen
ere the balance could escape to the upper terraces of the forest.

Frothing and shrieking in the insanity of his fury, Kerchak looked
about for the object of his greatest hatred, and there, upon a near-by
limb, he saw him sitting.

"Come down, Tarzan, great killer," cried Kerchak.  "Come down and feel
the fangs of a greater!  Do mighty fighters fly to the trees at the
first approach of danger?"  And then Kerchak emitted the volleying
challenge of his kind.

Quietly Tarzan dropped to the ground.  Breathlessly the tribe watched
from their lofty perches as Kerchak, still roaring, charged the
relatively puny figure.

Nearly seven feet stood Kerchak on his short legs.  His enormous
shoulders were bunched and rounded with huge muscles.  The back of his
short neck was as a single lump of iron sinew which bulged beyond the
base of his skull, so that his head seemed like a small ball protruding
from a huge mountain of flesh.

His back-drawn, snarling lips exposed his great fighting fangs, and his
little, wicked, blood-shot eyes gleamed in horrid reflection of his
madness.

Awaiting him stood Tarzan, himself a mighty muscled animal, but his six
feet of height and his great rolling sinews seemed pitifully inadequate
to the ordeal which awaited them.

His bow and arrows lay some distance away where he had dropped them
while showing Sabor's hide to his fellow apes, so that he confronted
Kerchak now with only his hunting knife and his superior intellect to
offset the ferocious strength of his enemy.

As his antagonist came roaring toward him, Lord Greystoke tore his long
knife from its sheath, and with an answering challenge as horrid and
bloodcurdling as that of the beast he faced, rushed swiftly to meet the
attack.  He was too shrewd to allow those long hairy arms to encircle
him, and just as their bodies were about to crash together, Tarzan of
the Apes grasped one of the huge wrists of his assailant, and,
springing lightly to one side, drove his knife to the hilt into
Kerchak's body, below the heart.

Before he could wrench the blade free again, the bull's quick lunge to
seize him in those awful arms had torn the weapon from Tarzan's grasp.

Kerchak aimed a terrific blow at the ape-man's head with the flat of
his hand, a blow which, had it landed, might easily have crushed in the
side of Tarzan's skull.

The man was too quick, and, ducking beneath it, himself delivered a
mighty one, with clenched fist, in the pit of Kerchak's stomach.

The ape was staggered, and what with the mortal wound in his side had
almost collapsed, when, with one mighty effort he rallied for an
instant--just long enough to enable him to wrest his arm free from
Tarzan's grasp and close in a terrific clinch with his wiry opponent.

Straining the ape-man close to him, his great jaws sought Tarzan's
throat, but the young lord's sinewy fingers were at Kerchak's own
before the cruel fangs could close on the sleek brown skin.

Thus they struggled, the one to crush out his opponent's life with
those awful teeth, the other to close forever the windpipe beneath his
strong grasp while he held the snarling mouth from him.

The greater strength of the ape was slowly prevailing, and the teeth of
the straining beast were scarce an inch from Tarzan's throat when, with
a shuddering tremor, the great body stiffened for an instant and then
sank limply to the ground.

Kerchak was dead.

Withdrawing the knife that had so often rendered him master of far
mightier muscles than his own, Tarzan of the Apes placed his foot upon
the neck of his vanquished enemy, and once again, loud through the
forest rang the fierce, wild cry of the conqueror.

And thus came the young Lord Greystoke into the kingship of the Apes.




Chapter XII

Man's Reason


There was one of the tribe of Tarzan who questioned his authority, and
that was Terkoz, the son of Tublat, but he so feared the keen knife and
the deadly arrows of his new lord that he confined the manifestation of
his objections to petty disobediences and irritating mannerisms; Tarzan
knew, however, that he but waited his opportunity to wrest the kingship
from him by some sudden stroke of treachery, and so he was ever on his
guard against surprise.

For months the life of the little band went on much as it had before,
except that Tarzan's greater intelligence and his ability as a hunter
were the means of providing for them more bountifully than ever before.
Most of them, therefore, were more than content with the change in
rulers.

Tarzan led them by night to the fields of the black men, and there,
warned by their chief's superior wisdom, they ate only what they
required, nor ever did they destroy what they could not eat, as is the
way of Manu, the monkey, and of most apes.

So, while the blacks were wroth at the continued pilfering of their
fields, they were not discouraged in their efforts to cultivate the
land, as would have been the case had Tarzan permitted his people to
lay waste the plantation wantonly.

During this period Tarzan paid many nocturnal visits to the village,
where he often renewed his supply of arrows.  He soon noticed the food
always standing at the foot of the tree which was his avenue into the
palisade, and after a little, he commenced to eat whatever the blacks
put there.

When the awe-struck savages saw that the food disappeared overnight
they were filled with consternation and dread, for it was one thing to
put food out to propitiate a god or a devil, but quite another thing to
have the spirit really come into the village and eat it.  Such a thing
was unheard of, and it clouded their superstitious minds with all
manner of vague fears.

Nor was this all.  The periodic disappearance of their arrows, and the
strange pranks perpetrated by unseen hands, had wrought them to such a
state that life had become a veritable burden in their new home, and
now it was that Mbonga and his head men began to talk of abandoning the
village and seeking a site farther on in the jungle.

Presently the black warriors began to strike farther and farther south
into the heart of the forest when they went to hunt, looking for a site
for a new village.

More often was the tribe of Tarzan disturbed by these wandering
huntsmen.  Now was the quiet, fierce solitude of the primeval forest
broken by new, strange cries.  No longer was there safety for bird or
beast.  Man had come.

Other animals passed up and down the jungle by day and by
night--fierce, cruel beasts--but their weaker neighbors only fled from
their immediate vicinity to return again when the danger was past.

With man it is different.  When he comes many of the larger animals
instinctively leave the district entirely, seldom if ever to return;
and thus it has always been with the great anthropoids.  They flee man
as man flees a pestilence.

For a short time the tribe of Tarzan lingered in the vicinity of the
beach because their new chief hated the thought of leaving the
treasured contents of the little cabin forever.  But when one day a
member of the tribe discovered the blacks in great numbers on the banks
of a little stream that had been their watering place for generations,
and in the act of clearing a space in the jungle and erecting many
huts, the apes would remain no longer; and so Tarzan led them inland
for many marches to a spot as yet undefiled by the foot of a human
being.

Once every moon Tarzan would go swinging rapidly back through the
swaying branches to have a day with his books, and to replenish his
supply of arrows.  This latter task was becoming more and more
difficult, for the blacks had taken to hiding their supply away at
night in granaries and living huts.

This necessitated watching by day on Tarzan's part to discover where
the arrows were being concealed.

Twice had he entered huts at night while the inmates lay sleeping upon
their mats, and stolen the arrows from the very sides of the warriors.
But this method he realized to be too fraught with danger, and so he
commenced picking up solitary hunters with his long, deadly noose,
stripping them of weapons and ornaments and dropping their bodies from
a high tree into the village street during the still watches of the
night.

These various escapades again so terrorized the blacks that, had it not
been for the monthly respite between Tarzan's visits, in which they had
opportunity to renew hope that each fresh incursion would prove the
last, they soon would have abandoned their new village.

The blacks had not as yet come upon Tarzan's cabin on the distant
beach, but the ape-man lived in constant dread that, while he was away
with the tribe, they would discover and despoil his treasure.  So it
came that he spent more and more time in the vicinity of his father's
last home, and less and less with the tribe.  Presently the members of
his little community began to suffer on account of his neglect, for
disputes and quarrels constantly arose which only the king might settle
peaceably.

At last some of the older apes spoke to Tarzan on the subject, and for
a month thereafter he remained constantly with the tribe.

The duties of kingship among the anthropoids are not many or arduous.

In the afternoon comes Thaka, possibly, to complain that old Mungo has
stolen his new wife.  Then must Tarzan summon all before him, and if he
finds that the wife prefers her new lord he commands that matters
remain as they are, or possibly that Mungo give Thaka one of his
daughters in exchange.

Whatever his decision, the apes accept it as final, and return to their
occupations satisfied.

Then comes Tana, shrieking and holding tight her side from which blood
is streaming.  Gunto, her husband, has cruelly bitten her!  And Gunto,
summoned, says that Tana is lazy and will not bring him nuts and
beetles, or scratch his back for him.

So Tarzan scolds them both and threatens Gunto with a taste of the
death-bearing slivers if he abuses Tana further, and Tana, for her
part, is compelled to promise better attention to her wifely duties.

And so it goes, little family differences for the most part, which, if
left unsettled would result finally in greater factional strife, and
the eventual dismemberment of the tribe.

But Tarzan tired of it, as he found that kingship meant the curtailment
of his liberty.  He longed for the little cabin and the sun-kissed
sea--for the cool interior of the well-built house, and for the
never-ending wonders of the many books.

As he had grown older, he found that he had grown away from his people.
Their interests and his were far removed.  They had not kept pace with
him, nor could they understand aught of the many strange and wonderful
dreams that passed through the active brain of their human king.  So
limited was their vocabulary that Tarzan could not even talk with them
of the many new truths, and the great fields of thought that his
reading had opened up before his longing eyes, or make known ambitions
which stirred his soul.

Among the tribe he no longer had friends as of old.  A little child may
find companionship in many strange and simple creatures, but to a grown
man there must be some semblance of equality in intellect as the basis
for agreeable association.

Had Kala lived, Tarzan would have sacrificed all else to remain near
her, but now that she was dead, and the playful friends of his
childhood grown into fierce and surly brutes he felt that he much
preferred the peace and solitude of his cabin to the irksome duties of
leadership amongst a horde of wild beasts.

The hatred and jealousy of Terkoz, son of Tublat, did much to
counteract the effect of Tarzan's desire to renounce his kingship among
the apes, for, stubborn young Englishman that he was, he could not
bring himself to retreat in the face of so malignant an enemy.

That Terkoz would be chosen leader in his stead he knew full well, for
time and again the ferocious brute had established his claim to
physical supremacy over the few bull apes who had dared resent his
savage bullying.

Tarzan would have liked to subdue the ugly beast without recourse to
knife or arrows.  So much had his great strength and agility increased
in the period following his maturity that he had come to believe that
he might master the redoubtable Terkoz in a hand to hand fight were it
not for the terrible advantage the anthropoid's huge fighting fangs
gave him over the poorly armed Tarzan.

The entire matter was taken out of Tarzan's hands one day by force of
circumstances, and his future left open to him, so that he might go or
stay without any stain upon his savage escutcheon.

It happened thus:

The tribe was feeding quietly, spread over a considerable area, when a
great screaming arose some distance east of where Tarzan lay upon his
belly beside a limpid brook, attempting to catch an elusive fish in his
quick, brown hands.

With one accord the tribe swung rapidly toward the frightened cries,
and there found Terkoz holding an old female by the hair and beating
her unmercifully with his great hands.

As Tarzan approached he raised his hand aloft for Terkoz to desist, for
the female was not his, but belonged to a poor old ape whose fighting
days were long over, and who, therefore, could not protect his family.

Terkoz knew that it was against the laws of his kind to strike this
woman of another, but being a bully, he had taken advantage of the
weakness of the female's husband to chastise her because she had
refused to give up to him a tender young rodent she had captured.

When Terkoz saw Tarzan approaching without his arrows, he continued to
belabor the poor woman in a studied effort to affront his hated
chieftain.

Tarzan did not repeat his warning signal, but instead rushed bodily
upon the waiting Terkoz.

Never had the ape-man fought so terrible a battle since that long-gone
day when Bolgani, the great king gorilla had so horribly manhandled him
ere the new-found knife had, by accident, pricked the savage heart.

Tarzan's knife on the present occasion but barely offset the gleaming
fangs of Terkoz, and what little advantage the ape had over the man in
brute strength was almost balanced by the latter's wonderful quickness
and agility.

In the sum total of their points, however, the anthropoid had a shade
the better of the battle, and had there been no other personal
attribute to influence the final outcome, Tarzan of the Apes, the young
Lord Greystoke, would have died as he had lived--an unknown savage
beast in equatorial Africa.

But there was that which had raised him far above his fellows of the
jungle--that little spark which spells the whole vast difference
between man and brute--Reason.  This it was which saved him from death
beneath the iron muscles and tearing fangs of Terkoz.

Scarcely had they fought a dozen seconds ere they were rolling upon the
ground, striking, tearing and rending--two great savage beasts battling
to the death.

Terkoz had a dozen knife wounds on head and breast, and Tarzan was torn
and bleeding--his scalp in one place half torn from his head so that a
great piece hung down over one eye, obstructing his vision.

But so far the young Englishman had been able to keep those horrible
fangs from his jugular and now, as they fought less fiercely for a
moment, to regain their breath, Tarzan formed a cunning plan.  He would
work his way to the other's back and, clinging there with tooth and
nail, drive his knife home until Terkoz was no more.

The maneuver was accomplished more easily than he had hoped, for the
stupid beast, not knowing what Tarzan was attempting, made no
particular effort to prevent the accomplishment of the design.

But when, finally, he realized that his antagonist was fastened to him
where his teeth and fists alike were useless against him, Terkoz hurled
himself about upon the ground so violently that Tarzan could but cling
desperately to the leaping, turning, twisting body, and ere he had
struck a blow the knife was hurled from his hand by a heavy impact
against the earth, and Tarzan found himself defenseless.

During the rollings and squirmings of the next few minutes, Tarzan's
hold was loosened a dozen times until finally an accidental
circumstance of those swift and everchanging evolutions gave him a new
hold with his right hand, which he realized was absolutely unassailable.

His arm was passed beneath Terkoz's arm from behind and his hand and
forearm encircled the back of Terkoz's neck.  It was the half-Nelson of
modern wrestling which the untaught ape-man had stumbled upon, but
superior reason showed him in an instant the value of the thing he had
discovered.  It was the difference to him between life and death.

And so he struggled to encompass a similar hold with the left hand, and
in a few moments Terkoz's bull neck was creaking beneath a full-Nelson.

There was no more lunging about now.  The two lay perfectly still upon
the ground, Tarzan upon Terkoz's back.  Slowly the bullet head of the
ape was being forced lower and lower upon his chest.

Tarzan knew what the result would be.  In an instant the neck would
break.  Then there came to Terkoz's rescue the same thing that had put
him in these sore straits--a man's reasoning power.

"If I kill him," thought Tarzan, "what advantage will it be to me?
Will it not rob the tribe of a great fighter?  And if Terkoz be dead,
he will know nothing of my supremacy, while alive he will ever be an
example to the other apes."

"KA-GODA?" hissed Tarzan in Terkoz's ear, which, in ape tongue, means,
freely translated:  "Do you surrender?"

For a moment there was no reply, and Tarzan added a few more ounces of
pressure, which elicited a horrified shriek of pain from the great
beast.

"KA-GODA?" repeated Tarzan.

"KA-GODA!" cried Terkoz.

"Listen," said Tarzan, easing up a trifle, but not releasing his hold.
"I am Tarzan, King of the Apes, mighty hunter, mighty fighter.  In all
the jungle there is none so great.

"You have said:  'KA-GODA' to me.  All the tribe have heard.  Quarrel
no more with your king or your people, for next time I shall kill you.
Do you understand?"

"HUH," assented Terkoz.

"And you are satisfied?"

"HUH," said the ape.

Tarzan let him up, and in a few minutes all were back at their
vocations, as though naught had occurred to mar the tranquility of
their primeval forest haunts.

But deep in the minds of the apes was rooted the conviction that Tarzan
was a mighty fighter and a strange creature.  Strange because he had
had it in his power to kill his enemy, but had allowed him to
live--unharmed.

That afternoon as the tribe came together, as was their wont before
darkness settled on the jungle, Tarzan, his wounds washed in the waters
of the stream, called the old males about him.

"You have seen again to-day that Tarzan of the Apes is the greatest
among you," he said.

"HUH," they replied with one voice, "Tarzan is great."

"Tarzan," he continued, "is not an ape.  He is not like his people.
His ways are not their ways, and so Tarzan is going back to the lair of
his own kind by the waters of the great lake which has no farther
shore.  You must choose another to rule you, for Tarzan will not
return."

And thus young Lord Greystoke took the first step toward the goal which
he had set--the finding of other white men like himself.




Chapter XIII

His Own Kind


The following morning, Tarzan, lame and sore from the wounds of his
battle with Terkoz, set out toward the west and the seacoast.

He traveled very slowly, sleeping in the jungle at night, and reaching
his cabin late the following morning.

For several days he moved about but little, only enough to gather what
fruits and nuts he required to satisfy the demands of hunger.

In ten days he was quite sound again, except for a terrible,
half-healed scar, which, starting above his left eye ran across the top
of his head, ending at the right ear.  It was the mark left by Terkoz
when he had torn the scalp away.

During his convalescence Tarzan tried to fashion a mantle from the skin
of Sabor, which had lain all this time in the cabin.  But he found the
hide had dried as stiff as a board, and as he knew naught of tanning,
he was forced to abandon his cherished plan.

Then he determined to filch what few garments he could from one of the
black men of Mbonga's village, for Tarzan of the Apes had decided to
mark his evolution from the lower orders in every possible manner, and
nothing seemed to him a more distinguishing badge of manhood than
ornaments and clothing.

To this end, therefore, he collected the various arm and leg ornaments
he had taken from the black warriors who had succumbed to his swift and
silent noose, and donned them all after the way he had seen them worn.

About his neck hung the golden chain from which depended the diamond
encrusted locket of his mother, the Lady Alice.  At his back was a
quiver of arrows slung from a leathern shoulder belt, another piece of
loot from some vanquished black.

About his waist was a belt of tiny strips of rawhide fashioned by
himself as a support for the home-made scabbard in which hung his
father's hunting knife.  The long bow which had been Kulonga's hung
over his left shoulder.

The young Lord Greystoke was indeed a strange and war-like figure, his
mass of black hair falling to his shoulders behind and cut with his
hunting knife to a rude bang upon his forehead, that it might not fall
before his eyes.

His straight and perfect figure, muscled as the best of the ancient
Roman gladiators must have been muscled, and yet with the soft and
sinuous curves of a Greek god, told at a glance the wondrous
combination of enormous strength with suppleness and speed.

A personification, was Tarzan of the Apes, of the primitive man, the
hunter, the warrior.

With the noble poise of his handsome head upon those broad shoulders,
and the fire of life and intelligence in those fine, clear eyes, he
might readily have typified some demigod of a wild and warlike bygone
people of his ancient forest.

But of these things Tarzan did not think.  He was worried because he
had not clothing to indicate to all the jungle folks that he was a man
and not an ape, and grave doubt often entered his mind as to whether he
might not yet become an ape.

Was not hair commencing to grow upon his face?  All the apes had hair
upon theirs but the black men were entirely hairless, with very few
exceptions.

True, he had seen pictures in his books of men with great masses of
hair upon lip and cheek and chin, but, nevertheless, Tarzan was afraid.
Almost daily he whetted his keen knife and scraped and whittled at his
young beard to eradicate this degrading emblem of apehood.

And so he learned to shave--rudely and painfully, it is true--but,
nevertheless, effectively.

When he felt quite strong again, after his bloody battle with Terkoz,
Tarzan set off one morning towards Mbonga's village.  He was moving
carelessly along a winding jungle trail, instead of making his progress
through the trees, when suddenly he came face to face with a black
warrior.

The look of surprise on the savage face was almost comical, and before
Tarzan could unsling his bow the fellow had turned and fled down the
path crying out in alarm as though to others before him.

Tarzan took to the trees in pursuit, and in a few moments came in view
of the men desperately striving to escape.

There were three of them, and they were racing madly in single file
through the dense undergrowth.

Tarzan easily distanced them, nor did they see his silent passage above
their heads, nor note the crouching figure squatted upon a low branch
ahead of them beneath which the trail led them.

Tarzan let the first two pass beneath him, but as the third came
swiftly on, the quiet noose dropped about the black throat.  A quick
jerk drew it taut.

There was an agonized scream from the victim, and his fellows turned to
see his struggling body rise as by magic slowly into the dense foliage
of the trees above.

With frightened shrieks they wheeled once more and plunged on in their
efforts to escape.

Tarzan dispatched his prisoner quickly and silently; removed the
weapons and ornaments, and--oh, the greatest joy of all--a handsome
deerskin breechcloth, which he quickly transferred to his own person.

Now indeed was he dressed as a man should be.  None there was who could
now doubt his high origin.  How he should have liked to have returned
to the tribe to parade before their envious gaze this wondrous finery.

Taking the body across his shoulder, he moved more slowly through the
trees toward the little palisaded village, for he again needed arrows.

As he approached quite close to the enclosure he saw an excited group
surrounding the two fugitives, who, trembling with fright and
exhaustion, were scarce able to recount the uncanny details of their
adventure.

Mirando, they said, who had been ahead of them a short distance, had
suddenly come screaming toward them, crying that a terrible white and
naked warrior was pursuing him.  The three of them had hurried toward
the village as rapidly as their legs would carry them.

Again Mirando's shrill cry of mortal terror had caused them to look
back, and there they had seen the most horrible sight--their
companion's body flying upwards into the trees, his arms and legs
beating the air and his tongue protruding from his open mouth.  No
other sound did he utter nor was there any creature in sight about him.

The villagers were worked up into a state of fear bordering on panic,
but wise old Mbonga affected to feel considerable skepticism regarding
the tale, and attributed the whole fabrication to their fright in the
face of some real danger.

"You tell us this great story," he said, "because you do not dare to
speak the truth.  You do not dare admit that when the lion sprang upon
Mirando you ran away and left him.  You are cowards."

Scarcely had Mbonga ceased speaking when a great crashing of branches
in the trees above them caused the blacks to look up in renewed terror.
The sight that met their eyes made even wise old Mbonga shudder, for
there, turning and twisting in the air, came the dead body of Mirando,
to sprawl with a sickening reverberation upon the ground at their feet.

With one accord the blacks took to their heels; nor did they stop until
the last of them was lost in the dense shadows of the surrounding
jungle.

Again Tarzan came down into the village and renewed his supply of
arrows and ate of the offering of food which the blacks had made to
appease his wrath.

Before he left he carried the body of Mirando to the gate of the
village, and propped it up against the palisade in such a way that the
dead face seemed to be peering around the edge of the gatepost down the
path which led to the jungle.

Then Tarzan returned, hunting, always hunting, to the cabin by the
beach.

It took a dozen attempts on the part of the thoroughly frightened
blacks to reenter their village, past the horrible, grinning face of
their dead fellow, and when they found the food and arrows gone they
knew, what they had only too well feared, that Mirando had seen the
evil spirit of the jungle.

That now seemed to them the logical explanation.  Only those who saw
this terrible god of the jungle died; for was it not true that none
left alive in the village had ever seen him?  Therefore, those who had
died at his hands must have seen him and paid the penalty with their
lives.

As long as they supplied him with arrows and food he would not harm
them unless they looked upon him, so it was ordered by Mbonga that in
addition to the food offering there should also be laid out an offering
of arrows for this Munan-go-Keewati, and this was done from then on.

If you ever chance to pass that far off African village you will still
see before a tiny thatched hut, built just without the village, a
little iron pot in which is a quantity of food, and beside it a quiver
of well-daubed arrows.

When Tarzan came in sight of the beach where stood his cabin, a strange
and unusual spectacle met his vision.

On the placid waters of the landlocked harbor floated a great ship, and
on the beach a small boat was drawn up.

But, most wonderful of all, a number of white men like himself were
moving about between the beach and his cabin.

Tarzan saw that in many ways they were like the men of his picture
books.  He crept closer through the trees until he was quite close
above them.

There were ten men, swarthy, sun-tanned, villainous looking fellows.
Now they had congregated by the boat and were talking in loud, angry
tones, with much gesticulating and shaking of fists.

Presently one of them, a little, mean-faced, black-bearded fellow with
a countenance which reminded Tarzan of Pamba, the rat, laid his hand
upon the shoulder of a giant who stood next him, and with whom all the
others had been arguing and quarreling.

The little man pointed inland, so that the giant was forced to turn
away from the others to look in the direction indicated.  As he turned,
the little, mean-faced man drew a revolver from his belt and shot the
giant in the back.

The big fellow threw his hands above his head, his knees bent beneath
him, and without a sound he tumbled forward upon the beach, dead.

The report of the weapon, the first that Tarzan had ever heard, filled
him with wonderment, but even this unaccustomed sound could not startle
his healthy nerves into even a semblance of panic.

The conduct of the white strangers it was that caused him the greatest
perturbation.  He puckered his brows into a frown of deep thought.  It
was well, thought he, that he had not given way to his first impulse to
rush forward and greet these white men as brothers.

They were evidently no different from the black men--no more civilized
than the apes--no less cruel than Sabor.

For a moment the others stood looking at the little, mean-faced man and
the giant lying dead upon the beach.

Then one of them laughed and slapped the little man upon the back.
There was much more talk and gesticulating, but less quarreling.

Presently they launched the boat and all jumped into it and rowed away
toward the great ship, where Tarzan could see other figures moving
about upon the deck.

When they had clambered aboard, Tarzan dropped to earth behind a great
tree and crept to his cabin, keeping it always between himself and the
ship.

Slipping in at the door he found that everything had been ransacked.
His books and pencils strewed the floor.  His weapons and shields and
other little store of treasures were littered about.

As he saw what had been done a great wave of anger surged through him,
and the new made scar upon his forehead stood suddenly out, a bar of
inflamed crimson against his tawny hide.

Quickly he ran to the cupboard and searched in the far recess of the
lower shelf.  Ah!  He breathed a sigh of relief as he drew out the
little tin box, and, opening it, found his greatest treasures
undisturbed.

The photograph of the smiling, strong-faced young man, and the little
black puzzle book were safe.

What was that?

His quick ear had caught a faint but unfamiliar sound.

Running to the window Tarzan looked toward the harbor, and there he saw
that a boat was being lowered from the great ship beside the one
already in the water.  Soon he saw many people clambering over the
sides of the larger vessel and dropping into the boats.  They were
coming back in full force.

For a moment longer Tarzan watched while a number of boxes and bundles
were lowered into the waiting boats, then, as they shoved off from the
ship's side, the ape-man snatched up a piece of paper, and with a
pencil printed on it for a few moments until it bore several lines of
strong, well-made, almost letter-perfect characters.

This notice he stuck upon the door with a small sharp splinter of wood.
Then gathering up his precious tin box, his arrows, and as many bows
and spears as he could carry, he hastened through the door and
disappeared into the forest.

When the two boats were beached upon the silvery sand it was a strange
assortment of humanity that clambered ashore.

Some twenty souls in all there were, fifteen of them rough and
villainous appearing seamen.

The others of the party were of different stamp.

One was an elderly man, with white hair and large rimmed spectacles.
His slightly stooped shoulders were draped in an ill-fitting, though
immaculate, frock coat, and a shiny silk hat added to the incongruity
of his garb in an African jungle.

The second member of the party to land was a tall young man in white
ducks, while directly behind came another elderly man with a very high
forehead and a fussy, excitable manner.

After these came a huge Negress clothed like Solomon as to colors.  Her
great eyes rolled in evident terror, first toward the jungle and then
toward the cursing band of sailors who were removing the bales and
boxes from the boats.

The last member of the party to disembark was a girl of about nineteen,
and it was the young man who stood at the boat's prow to lift her high
and dry upon land.  She gave him a brave and pretty smile of thanks,
but no words passed between them.

In silence the party advanced toward the cabin.  It was evident that
whatever their intentions, all had been decided upon before they left
the ship; and so they came to the door, the sailors carrying the boxes
and bales, followed by the five who were of so different a class.  The
men put down their burdens, and then one caught sight of the notice
which Tarzan had posted.

"Ho, mates!" he cried.  "What's here?  This sign was not posted an hour
ago or I'll eat the cook."

The others gathered about, craning their necks over the shoulders of
those before them, but as few of them could read at all, and then only
after the most laborious fashion, one finally turned to the little old
man of the top hat and frock coat.

"Hi, perfesser," he called, "step for'rd and read the bloomin' notis."

Thus addressed, the old man came slowly to where the sailors stood,
followed by the other members of his party.  Adjusting his spectacles
he looked for a moment at the placard and then, turning away, strolled
off muttering to himself:  "Most remarkable--most remarkable!"

"Hi, old fossil," cried the man who had first called on him for
assistance, "did je think we wanted of you to read the bloomin' notis
to yourself?  Come back here and read it out loud, you old barnacle."

The old man stopped and, turning back, said:  "Oh, yes, my dear sir, a
thousand pardons.  It was quite thoughtless of me, yes--very
thoughtless.  Most remarkable--most remarkable!"

Again he faced the notice and read it through, and doubtless would have
turned off again to ruminate upon it had not the sailor grasped him
roughly by the collar and howled into his ear.

"Read it out loud, you blithering old idiot."

"Ah, yes indeed, yes indeed," replied the professor softly, and
adjusting his spectacles once more he read aloud:

      THIS IS THE HOUSE OF TARZAN, THE
  KILLER OF BEASTS AND MANY BLACK
  MEN.  DO NOT HARM THE THINGS WHICH
  ARE TARZAN'S.  TARZAN WATCHES.
      TARZAN OF THE APES.


"Who the devil is Tarzan?" cried the sailor who had before spoken.

"He evidently speaks English," said the young man.

"But what does 'Tarzan of the Apes' mean?" cried the girl.

"I do not know, Miss Porter," replied the young man, "unless we have
discovered a runaway simian from the London Zoo who has brought back a
European education to his jungle home.  What do you make of it,
Professor Porter?" he added, turning to the old man.

Professor Archimedes Q. Porter adjusted his spectacles.

"Ah, yes, indeed; yes indeed--most remarkable, most remarkable!" said
the professor; "but I can add nothing further to what I have already
remarked in elucidation of this truly momentous occurrence," and the
professor turned slowly in the direction of the jungle.

"But, papa," cried the girl, "you haven't said anything about it yet."

"Tut, tut, child; tut, tut," responded Professor Porter, in a kindly
and indulgent tone, "do not trouble your pretty head with such weighty
and abstruse problems," and again he wandered slowly off in still
another direction, his eyes bent upon the ground at his feet, his hands
clasped behind him beneath the flowing tails of his coat.

"I reckon the daffy old bounder don't know no more'n we do about it,"
growled the rat-faced sailor.

"Keep a civil tongue in your head," cried the young man, his face
paling in anger, at the insulting tone of the sailor.  "You've murdered
our officers and robbed us.  We are absolutely in your power, but
you'll treat Professor Porter and Miss Porter with respect or I'll
break that vile neck of yours with my bare hands--guns or no guns," and
the young fellow stepped so close to the rat-faced sailor that the
latter, though he bore two revolvers and a villainous looking knife in
his belt, slunk back abashed.

"You damned coward," cried the young man.  "You'd never dare shoot a
man until his back was turned.  You don't dare shoot me even then," and
he deliberately turned his back full upon the sailor and walked
nonchalantly away as if to put him to the test.

The sailor's hand crept slyly to the butt of one of his revolvers; his
wicked eyes glared vengefully at the retreating form of the young
Englishman.  The gaze of his fellows was upon him, but still he
hesitated.  At heart he was even a greater coward than Mr. William
Cecil Clayton had imagined.

Two keen eyes had watched every move of the party from the foliage of a
nearby tree.  Tarzan had seen the surprise caused by his notice, and
while he could understand nothing of the spoken language of these
strange people their gestures and facial expressions told him much.

The act of the little rat-faced sailor in killing one of his comrades
had aroused a strong dislike in Tarzan, and now that he saw him
quarreling with the fine-looking young man his animosity was still
further stirred.

Tarzan had never seen the effects of a firearm before, though his books
had taught him something of them, but when he saw the rat-faced one
fingering the butt of his revolver he thought of the scene he had
witnessed so short a time before, and naturally expected to see the
young man murdered as had been the huge sailor earlier in the day.

So Tarzan fitted a poisoned arrow to his bow and drew a bead upon the
rat-faced sailor, but the foliage was so thick that he soon saw the
arrow would be deflected by the leaves or some small branch, and
instead he launched a heavy spear from his lofty perch.

Clayton had taken but a dozen steps.  The rat-faced sailor had half
drawn his revolver; the other sailors stood watching the scene intently.

Professor Porter had already disappeared into the jungle, whither he
was being followed by the fussy Samuel T.  Philander, his secretary and
assistant.

Esmeralda, the Negress, was busy sorting her mistress' baggage from the
pile of bales and boxes beside the cabin, and Miss Porter had turned
away to follow Clayton, when something caused her to turn again toward
the sailor.

And then three things happened almost simultaneously.  The sailor
jerked out his weapon and leveled it at Clayton's back, Miss Porter
screamed a warning, and a long, metal-shod spear shot like a bolt from
above and passed entirely through the right shoulder of the rat-faced
man.

The revolver exploded harmlessly in the air, and the seaman crumpled up
with a scream of pain and terror.

Clayton turned and rushed back toward the scene.  The sailors stood in
a frightened group, with drawn weapons, peering into the jungle.  The
wounded man writhed and shrieked upon the ground.

Clayton, unseen by any, picked up the fallen revolver and slipped it
inside his shirt, then he joined the sailors in gazing, mystified, into
the jungle.

"Who could it have been?" whispered Jane Porter, and the young man
turned to see her standing, wide-eyed and wondering, close beside him.

"I dare say Tarzan of the Apes is watching us all right," he answered,
in a dubious tone.  "I wonder, now, who that spear was intended for.
If for Snipes, then our ape friend is a friend indeed.

"By jove, where are your father and Mr. Philander?  There's someone or
something in that jungle, and it's armed, whatever it is.  Ho!
Professor!  Mr. Philander!" young Clayton shouted.  There was no
response.

"What's to be done, Miss Porter?" continued the young man, his face
clouded by a frown of worry and indecision.

"I can't leave you here alone with these cutthroats, and you certainly
can't venture into the jungle with me; yet someone must go in search of
your father.  He is more than apt to wandering off aimlessly,
regardless of danger or direction, and Mr. Philander is only a trifle
less impractical than he.  You will pardon my bluntness, but our lives
are all in jeopardy here, and when we get your father back something
must be done to impress upon him the dangers to which he exposes you as
well as himself by his absent-mindedness."

"I quite agree with you," replied the girl, "and I am not offended at
all.  Dear old papa would sacrifice his life for me without an
instant's hesitation, provided one could keep his mind on so frivolous
a matter for an entire instant.  There is only one way to keep him in
safety, and that is to chain him to a tree.  The poor dear is SO
impractical."

"I have it!" suddenly exclaimed Clayton.  "You can use a revolver,
can't you?"

"Yes.  Why?"

"I have one.  With it you and Esmeralda will be comparatively safe in
this cabin while I am searching for your father and Mr. Philander.
Come, call the woman and I will hurry on.  They can't have gone far."

Jane did as he suggested and when he saw the door close safely behind
them Clayton turned toward the jungle.

Some of the sailors were drawing the spear from their wounded comrade
and, as Clayton approached, he asked if he could borrow a revolver from
one of them while he searched the jungle for the professor.

The rat-faced one, finding he was not dead, had regained his composure,
and with a volley of oaths directed at Clayton refused in the name of
his fellows to allow the young man any firearms.

This man, Snipes, had assumed the role of chief since he had killed
their former leader, and so little time had elapsed that none of his
companions had as yet questioned his authority.

Clayton's only response was a shrug of the shoulders, but as he left
them he picked up the spear which had transfixed Snipes, and thus
primitively armed, the son of the then Lord Greystoke strode into the
dense jungle.

Every few moments he called aloud the names of the wanderers.  The
watchers in the cabin by the beach heard the sound of his voice growing
ever fainter and fainter, until at last it was swallowed up by the
myriad noises of the primeval wood.

When Professor Archimedes Q. Porter and his assistant, Samuel T.
Philander, after much insistence on the part of the latter, had finally
turned their steps toward camp, they were as completely lost in the
wild and tangled labyrinth of the matted jungle as two human beings
well could be, though they did not know it.

It was by the merest caprice of fortune that they headed toward the
west coast of Africa, instead of toward Zanzibar on the opposite side
of the dark continent.

When in a short time they reached the beach, only to find no camp in
sight, Philander was positive that they were north of their proper
destination, while, as a matter of fact they were about two hundred
yards south of it.

It never occurred to either of these impractical theorists to call
aloud on the chance of attracting their friends' attention.  Instead,
with all the assurance that deductive reasoning from a wrong premise
induces in one, Mr. Samuel T. Philander grasped Professor Archimedes Q.
Porter firmly by the arm and hurried the weakly protesting old
gentleman off in the direction of Cape Town, fifteen hundred miles to
the south.

When Jane and Esmeralda found themselves safely behind the cabin door
the Negress's first thought was to barricade the portal from the
inside.  With this idea in mind she turned to search for some means of
putting it into execution; but her first view of the interior of the
cabin brought a shriek of terror to her lips, and like a frightened
child the huge woman ran to bury her face on her mistress' shoulder.

Jane, turning at the cry, saw the cause of it lying prone upon the
floor before them--the whitened skeleton of a man.  A further glance
revealed a second skeleton upon the bed.

"What horrible place are we in?" murmured the awe-struck girl.  But
there was no panic in her fright.

At last, disengaging herself from the frantic clutch of the still
shrieking Esmeralda, Jane crossed the room to look into the little
cradle, knowing what she should see there even before the tiny skeleton
disclosed itself in all its pitiful and pathetic frailty.

What an awful tragedy these poor mute bones proclaimed!  The girl
shuddered at thought of the eventualities which might lie before
herself and her friends in this ill-fated cabin, the haunt of
mysterious, perhaps hostile, beings.

Quickly, with an impatient stamp of her little foot, she endeavored to
shake off the gloomy forebodings, and turning to Esmeralda bade her
cease her wailing.

"Stop, Esmeralda, stop it this minute!" she cried.  "You are only
making it worse."

She ended lamely, a little quiver in her own voice as she thought of
the three men, upon whom she depended for protection, wandering in the
depth of that awful forest.

Soon the girl found that the door was equipped with a heavy wooden bar
upon the inside, and after several efforts the combined strength of the
two enabled them to slip it into place, the first time in twenty years.

Then they sat down upon a bench with their arms about one another, and
waited.




Chapter XIV

At the Mercy of the Jungle


After Clayton had plunged into the jungle, the sailors--mutineers of
the Arrow--fell into a discussion of their next step; but on one point
all were agreed--that they should hasten to put off to the anchored
Arrow, where they could at least be safe from the spears of their
unseen foe.  And so, while Jane Porter and Esmeralda were barricading
themselves within the cabin, the cowardly crew of cutthroats were
pulling rapidly for their ship in the two boats that had brought them
ashore.

So much had Tarzan seen that day that his head was in a whirl of
wonder.  But the most wonderful sight of all, to him, was the face of
the beautiful white girl.

Here at last was one of his own kind; of that he was positive.  And the
young man and the two old men; they, too, were much as he had pictured
his own people to be.

But doubtless they were as ferocious and cruel as other men he had
seen.  The fact that they alone of all the party were unarmed might
account for the fact that they had killed no one.  They might be very
different if provided with weapons.

Tarzan had seen the young man pick up the fallen revolver of the
wounded Snipes and hide it away in his breast; and he had also seen him
slip it cautiously to the girl as she entered the cabin door.

He did not understand anything of the motives behind all that he had
seen; but, somehow, intuitively he liked the young man and the two old
men, and for the girl he had a strange longing which he scarcely
understood.  As for the big black woman, she was evidently connected in
some way to the girl, and so he liked her, also.

For the sailors, and especially Snipes, he had developed a great
hatred.  He knew by their threatening gestures and by the expression
upon their evil faces that they were enemies of the others of the
party, and so he decided to watch closely.

Tarzan wondered why the men had gone into the jungle, nor did it ever
occur to him that one could become lost in that maze of undergrowth
which to him was as simple as is the main street of your own home town
to you.

When he saw the sailors row away toward the ship, and knew that the
girl and her companion were safe in his cabin, Tarzan decided to follow
the young man into the jungle and learn what his errand might be.  He
swung off rapidly in the direction taken by Clayton, and in a short
time heard faintly in the distance the now only occasional calls of the
Englishman to his friends.

Presently Tarzan came up with the white man, who, almost fagged, was
leaning against a tree wiping the perspiration from his forehead.  The
ape-man, hiding safe behind a screen of foliage, sat watching this new
specimen of his own race intently.

At intervals Clayton called aloud and finally it came to Tarzan that he
was searching for the old man.

Tarzan was on the point of going off to look for them himself, when he
caught the yellow glint of a sleek hide moving cautiously through the
jungle toward Clayton.

It was Sheeta, the leopard.  Now, Tarzan heard the soft bending of
grasses and wondered why the young white man was not warned.  Could it
be he had failed to note the loud warning?  Never before had Tarzan
known Sheeta to be so clumsy.

No, the white man did not hear.  Sheeta was crouching for the spring,
and then, shrill and horrible, there rose from the stillness of the
jungle the awful cry of the challenging ape, and Sheeta turned,
crashing into the underbrush.

Clayton came to his feet with a start.  His blood ran cold.  Never in
all his life had so fearful a sound smote upon his ears.  He was no
coward; but if ever man felt the icy fingers of fear upon his heart,
William Cecil Clayton, eldest son of Lord Greystoke of England, did
that day in the fastness of the African jungle.

The noise of some great body crashing through the underbrush so close
beside him, and the sound of that bloodcurdling shriek from above,
tested Clayton's courage to the limit; but he could not know that it
was to that very voice he owed his life, nor that the creature who
hurled it forth was his own cousin--the real Lord Greystoke.

The afternoon was drawing to a close, and Clayton, disheartened and
discouraged, was in a terrible quandary as to the proper course to
pursue; whether to keep on in search of Professor Porter, at the almost
certain risk of his own death in the jungle by night, or to return to
the cabin where he might at least serve to protect Jane from the perils
which confronted her on all sides.

He did not wish to return to camp without her father; still more, he
shrank from the thought of leaving her alone and unprotected in the
hands of the mutineers of the Arrow, or to the hundred unknown dangers
of the jungle.

Possibly, too, he thought, the professor and Philander might have
returned to camp.  Yes, that was more than likely.  At least he would
return and see, before he continued what seemed to be a most fruitless
quest.  And so he started, stumbling back through the thick and matted
underbrush in the direction that he thought the cabin lay.

To Tarzan's surprise the young man was heading further into the jungle
in the general direction of Mbonga's village, and the shrewd young
ape-man was convinced that he was lost.

To Tarzan this was scarcely comprehensible; his judgment told him
that no man would venture toward the village of the cruel blacks armed
only with a spear which, from the awkward way in which he carried it,
was evidently an unaccustomed weapon to this white man.  Nor was he
following the trail of the old men.  That, they had crossed and left
long since, though it had been fresh and plain before Tarzan's eyes.

Tarzan was perplexed.  The fierce jungle would make easy prey of this
unprotected stranger in a very short time if he were not guided quickly
to the beach.

Yes, there was Numa, the lion, even now, stalking the white man a dozen
paces to the right.

Clayton heard the great body paralleling his course, and now there rose
upon the evening air the beast's thunderous roar.  The man stopped with
upraised spear and faced the brush from which issued the awful sound.
The shadows were deepening, darkness was settling in.

God!  To die here alone, beneath the fangs of wild beasts; to be torn
and rended; to feel the hot breath of the brute on his face as the
great paw crushed down upon his breast!

For a moment all was still.  Clayton stood rigid, with raised spear.
Presently a faint rustling of the bush apprised him of the stealthy
creeping of the thing behind.  It was gathering for the spring.  At
last he saw it, not twenty feet away--the long, lithe, muscular body
and tawny head of a huge black-maned lion.

The beast was upon its belly, moving forward very slowly.  As its eyes
met Clayton's it stopped, and deliberately, cautiously gathered its
hind quarters behind it.

In agony the man watched, fearful to launch his spear, powerless to fly.

He heard a noise in the tree above him.  Some new danger, he thought,
but he dared not take his eyes from the yellow green orbs before him.
There was a sharp twang as of a broken banjo-string, and at the same
instant an arrow appeared in the yellow hide of the crouching lion.

With a roar of pain and anger the beast sprang; but, somehow, Clayton
stumbled to one side, and as he turned again to face the infuriated
king of beasts, he was appalled at the sight which confronted him.
Almost simultaneously with the lion's turning to renew the attack a
half-naked giant dropped from the tree above squarely on the brute's
back.

With lightning speed an arm that was banded layers of iron muscle
encircled the huge neck, and the great beast was raised from behind,
roaring and pawing the air--raised as easily as Clayton would have
lifted a pet dog.

The scene he witnessed there in the twilight depths of the African
jungle was burned forever into the Englishman's brain.

The man before him was the embodiment of physical perfection and giant
strength; yet it was not upon these he depended in his battle with the
great cat, for mighty as were his muscles, they were as nothing by
comparison with Numa's.  To his agility, to his brain and to his long
keen knife he owed his supremacy.

His right arm encircled the lion's neck, while the left hand plunged
the knife time and again into the unprotected side behind the left
shoulder.  The infuriated beast, pulled up and backwards until he stood
upon his hind legs, struggled impotently in this unnatural position.

Had the battle been of a few seconds' longer duration the outcome might
have been different, but it was all accomplished so quickly that the
lion had scarce time to recover from the confusion of its surprise ere
it sank lifeless to the ground.

Then the strange figure which had vanquished it stood erect upon the
carcass, and throwing back the wild and handsome head, gave out the
fearsome cry which a few moments earlier had so startled Clayton.

Before him he saw the figure of a young man, naked except for a loin
cloth and a few barbaric ornaments about arms and legs; on the breast a
priceless diamond locket gleaming against a smooth brown skin.

The hunting knife had been returned to its homely sheath, and the man
was gathering up his bow and quiver from where he had tossed them when
he leaped to attack the lion.

Clayton spoke to the stranger in English, thanking him for his brave
rescue and complimenting him on the wondrous strength and dexterity he
had displayed, but the only answer was a steady stare and a faint shrug
of the mighty shoulders, which might betoken either disparagement of
the service rendered, or ignorance of Clayton's language.

When the bow and quiver had been slung to his back the wild man, for
such Clayton now thought him, once more drew his knife and deftly
carved a dozen large strips of meat from the lion's carcass.  Then,
squatting upon his haunches, he proceeded to eat, first motioning
Clayton to join him.

The strong white teeth sank into the raw and dripping flesh in apparent
relish of the meal, but Clayton could not bring himself to share the
uncooked meat with his strange host; instead he watched him, and
presently there dawned upon him the conviction that this was Tarzan of
the Apes, whose notice he had seen posted upon the cabin door that
morning.

If so he must speak English.

Again Clayton attempted speech with the ape-man; but the replies, now
vocal, were in a strange tongue, which resembled the chattering of
monkeys mingled with the growling of some wild beast.

No, this could not be Tarzan of the Apes, for it was very evident that
he was an utter stranger to English.

When Tarzan had completed his repast he rose and, pointing a very
different direction from that which Clayton had been pursuing, started
off through the jungle toward the point he had indicated.

Clayton, bewildered and confused, hesitated to follow him, for he
thought he was but being led more deeply into the mazes of the forest;
but the ape-man, seeing him disinclined to follow, returned, and,
grasping him by the coat, dragged him along until he was convinced that
Clayton understood what was required of him.  Then he left him to
follow voluntarily.

The Englishman, finally concluding that he was a prisoner, saw no
alternative open but to accompany his captor, and thus they traveled
slowly through the jungle while the sable mantle of the impenetrable
forest night fell about them, and the stealthy footfalls of padded paws
mingled with the breaking of twigs and the wild calls of the savage
life that Clayton felt closing in upon him.

Suddenly Clayton heard the faint report of a firearm--a single shot,
and then silence.

In the cabin by the beach two thoroughly terrified women clung to each
other as they crouched upon the low bench in the gathering darkness.

The Negress sobbed hysterically, bemoaning the evil day that had
witnessed her departure from her dear Maryland, while the white girl,
dry eyed and outwardly calm, was torn by inward fears and forebodings.
She feared not more for herself than for the three men whom she knew to
be wandering in the abysmal depths of the savage jungle, from which she
now heard issuing the almost incessant shrieks and roars, barkings and
growlings of its terrifying and fearsome denizens as they sought their
prey.

And now there came the sound of a heavy body brushing against the side
of the cabin.  She could hear the great padded paws upon the ground
outside.  For an instant, all was silence; even the bedlam of the
forest died to a faint murmur.  Then she distinctly heard the beast
outside sniffing at the door, not two feet from where she crouched.
Instinctively the girl shuddered, and shrank closer to the black woman.

"Hush!" she whispered.  "Hush, Esmeralda," for the woman's sobs and
groans seemed to have attracted the thing that stalked there just
beyond the thin wall.

A gentle scratching sound was heard on the door.  The brute tried to
force an entrance; but presently this ceased, and again she heard the
great pads creeping stealthily around the cabin.  Again they
stopped--beneath the window on which the terrified eyes of the girl now
glued themselves.

"God!" she murmured, for now, silhouetted against the moonlit sky
beyond, she saw framed in the tiny square of the latticed window the
head of a huge lioness.  The gleaming eyes were fixed upon her in
intent ferocity.

"Look, Esmeralda!" she whispered.  "For God's sake, what shall we do?
Look!  Quick!  The window!"

Esmeralda, cowering still closer to her mistress, took one frightened
glance toward the little square of moonlight, just as the lioness
emitted a low, savage snarl.

The sight that met the poor woman's eyes was too much for the already
overstrung nerves.

"Oh, Gaberelle!" she shrieked, and slid to the floor an inert and
senseless mass.

For what seemed an eternity the great brute stood with its forepaws
upon the sill, glaring into the little room.  Presently it tried the
strength of the lattice with its great talons.

The girl had almost ceased to breathe, when, to her relief, the head
disappeared and she heard the brute's footsteps leaving the window.
But now they came to the door again, and once more the scratching
commenced; this time with increasing force until the great beast was
tearing at the massive panels in a perfect frenzy of eagerness to seize
its defenseless victims.

Could Jane have known the immense strength of that door, built piece by
piece, she would have felt less fear of the lioness reaching her by
this avenue.

Little did John Clayton imagine when he fashioned that crude but mighty
portal that one day, twenty years later, it would shield a fair
American girl, then unborn, from the teeth and talons of a man-eater.

For fully twenty minutes the brute alternately sniffed and tore at the
door, occasionally giving voice to a wild, savage cry of baffled rage.
At length, however, she gave up the attempt, and Jane heard her
returning toward the window, beneath which she paused for an instant,
and then launched her great weight against the timeworn lattice.

The girl heard the wooden rods groan beneath the impact; but they held,
and the huge body dropped back to the ground below.

Again and again the lioness repeated these tactics, until finally the
horrified prisoner within saw a portion of the lattice give way, and in
an instant one great paw and the head of the animal were thrust within
the room.

Slowly the powerful neck and shoulders spread the bars apart, and the
lithe body protruded farther and farther into the room.

As in a trance, the girl rose, her hand upon her breast, wide eyes
staring horror-stricken into the snarling face of the beast scarce ten
feet from her.  At her feet lay the prostrate form of the Negress.  If
she could but arouse her, their combined efforts might possibly avail
to beat back the fierce and bloodthirsty intruder.

Jane stooped to grasp the black woman by the shoulder.  Roughly she
shook her.

"Esmeralda!  Esmeralda!" she cried.  "Help me, or we are lost."

Esmeralda opened her eyes.  The first object they encountered was the
dripping fangs of the hungry lioness.

With a horrified scream the poor woman rose to her hands and knees, and
in this position scurried across the room, shrieking: "O Gaberelle!  O
Gaberelle!" at the top of her lungs.

Esmeralda weighed some two hundred and eighty pounds, and her extreme
haste, added to her extreme corpulency, produced a most amazing result
when Esmeralda elected to travel on all fours.

For a moment the lioness remained quiet with intense gaze directed upon
the flitting Esmeralda, whose goal appeared to be the cupboard, into
which she attempted to propel her huge bulk; but as the shelves were
but nine or ten inches apart, she only succeeded in getting her head
in; whereupon, with a final screech, which paled the jungle noises into
insignificance, she fainted once again.

With the subsidence of Esmeralda the lioness renewed her efforts to
wriggle her huge bulk through the weakening lattice.

The girl, standing pale and rigid against the farther wall, sought with
ever-increasing terror for some loophole of escape.  Suddenly her hand,
tight-pressed against her bosom, felt the hard outline of the revolver
that Clayton had left with her earlier in the day.

Quickly she snatched it from its hiding-place, and, leveling it full at
the lioness's face, pulled the trigger.

There was a flash of flame, the roar of the discharge, and an answering
roar of pain and anger from the beast.

Jane Porter saw the great form disappear from the window, and then she,
too, fainted, the revolver falling at her side.

But Sabor was not killed.  The bullet had but inflicted a painful wound
in one of the great shoulders.  It was the surprise at the blinding
flash and the deafening roar that had caused her hasty but temporary
retreat.

In another instant she was back at the lattice, and with renewed fury
was clawing at the aperture, but with lessened effect, since the
wounded member was almost useless.

She saw her prey--the two women--lying senseless upon the floor.  There
was no longer any resistance to be overcome.  Her meat lay before her,
and Sabor had only to worm her way through the lattice to claim it.

Slowly she forced her great bulk, inch by inch, through the opening.
Now her head was through, now one great forearm and shoulder.

Carefully she drew up the wounded member to insinuate it gently beyond
the tight pressing bars.

A moment more and both shoulders through, the long, sinuous body and
the narrow hips would glide quickly after.

It was on this sight that Jane Porter again opened her eyes.




Chapter XV

The Forest God


When Clayton heard the report of the firearm he fell into an agony of
fear and apprehension.  He knew that one of the sailors might be the
author of it; but the fact that he had left the revolver with Jane,
together with the overwrought condition of his nerves, made him
morbidly positive that she was threatened with some great danger.
Perhaps even now she was attempting to defend herself against some
savage man or beast.

What were the thoughts of his strange captor or guide Clayton could
only vaguely conjecture; but that he had heard the shot, and was in
some manner affected by it was quite evident, for he quickened his pace
so appreciably that Clayton, stumbling blindly in his wake, was down a
dozen times in as many minutes in a vain effort to keep pace with him,
and soon was left hopelessly behind.

Fearing that he would again be irretrievably lost, he called aloud to
the wild man ahead of him, and in a moment had the satisfaction of
seeing him drop lightly to his side from the branches above.

For a moment Tarzan looked at the young man closely, as though
undecided as to just what was best to do; then, stooping down before
Clayton, he motioned him to grasp him about the neck, and, with the
white man upon his back, Tarzan took to the trees.

The next few minutes the young Englishman never forgot.  High into
bending and swaying branches he was borne with what seemed to him
incredible swiftness, while Tarzan chafed at the slowness of his
progress.

From one lofty branch the agile creature swung with Clayton through a
dizzy arc to a neighboring tree; then for a hundred yards maybe the
sure feet threaded a maze of interwoven limbs, balancing like a
tightrope walker high above the black depths of verdure beneath.

From the first sensation of chilling fear Clayton passed to one of keen
admiration and envy of those giant muscles and that wondrous instinct
or knowledge which guided this forest god through the inky blackness of
the night as easily and safely as Clayton would have strolled a London
street at high noon.

Occasionally they would enter a spot where the foliage above was less
dense, and the bright rays of the moon lit up before Clayton's
wondering eyes the strange path they were traversing.

At such times the man fairly caught his breath at sight of the horrid
depths below them, for Tarzan took the easiest way, which often led
over a hundred feet above the earth.

And yet with all his seeming speed, Tarzan was in reality feeling his
way with comparative slowness, searching constantly for limbs of
adequate strength for the maintenance of this double weight.

Presently they came to the clearing before the beach.  Tarzan's quick
ears had heard the strange sounds of Sabor's efforts to force her way
through the lattice, and it seemed to Clayton that they dropped a
straight hundred feet to earth, so quickly did Tarzan descend.  Yet
when they struck the ground it was with scarce a jar; and as Clayton
released his hold on the ape-man he saw him dart like a squirrel for
the opposite side of the cabin.

The Englishman sprang quickly after him just in time to see the hind
quarters of some huge animal about to disappear through the window of
the cabin.

As Jane opened her eyes to a realization of the imminent peril which
threatened her, her brave young heart gave up at last its final vestige
of hope.  But then to her surprise she saw the huge animal being slowly
drawn back through the window, and in the moonlight beyond she saw the
heads and shoulders of two men.

As Clayton rounded the corner of the cabin to behold the animal
disappearing within, it was also to see the ape-man seize the long tail
in both hands, and, bracing himself with his feet against the side of
the cabin, throw all his mighty strength into the effort to draw the
beast out of the interior.

Clayton was quick to lend a hand, but the ape-man jabbered to him in a
commanding and peremptory tone something which Clayton knew to be
orders, though he could not understand them.

At last, under their combined efforts, the great body was slowly
dragged farther and farther outside the window, and then there came to
Clayton's mind a dawning conception of the rash bravery of his
companion's act.

For a naked man to drag a shrieking, clawing man-eater forth from a
window by the tail to save a strange white girl, was indeed the last
word in heroism.

Insofar as Clayton was concerned it was a very different matter, since
the girl was not only of his own kind and race, but was the one woman
in all the world whom he loved.

Though he knew that the lioness would make short work of both of them,
he pulled with a will to keep it from Jane Porter.  And then he
recalled the battle between this man and the great, black-maned lion
which he had witnessed a short time before, and he commenced to feel
more assurance.

Tarzan was still issuing orders which Clayton could not understand.

He was trying to tell the stupid white man to plunge his poisoned
arrows into Sabor's back and sides, and to reach the savage heart with
the long, thin hunting knife that hung at Tarzan's hip; but the man
would not understand, and Tarzan did not dare release his hold to do
the things himself, for he knew that the puny white man never could
hold mighty Sabor alone, for an instant.

Slowly the lioness was emerging from the window.  At last her shoulders
were out.

And then Clayton saw an incredible thing.  Tarzan, racking his brains
for some means to cope single-handed with the infuriated beast, had
suddenly recalled his battle with Terkoz; and as the great shoulders
came clear of the window, so that the lioness hung upon the sill only
by her forepaws, Tarzan suddenly released his hold upon the brute.

With the quickness of a striking rattler he launched himself full upon
Sabor's back, his strong young arms seeking and gaining a full-Nelson
upon the beast, as he had learned it that other day during his bloody,
wrestling victory over Terkoz.

With a roar the lioness turned completely over upon her back, falling
full upon her enemy; but the black-haired giant only closed tighter his
hold.

Pawing and tearing at earth and air, Sabor rolled and threw herself
this way and that in an effort to dislodge this strange antagonist; but
ever tighter and tighter drew the iron bands that were forcing her head
lower and lower upon her tawny breast.

Higher crept the steel forearms of the ape-man about the back of
Sabor's neck.  Weaker and weaker became the lioness's efforts.

At last Clayton saw the immense muscles of Tarzan's shoulders and
biceps leap into corded knots beneath the silver moonlight.  There was
a long sustained and supreme effort on the ape-man's part--and the
vertebrae of Sabor's neck parted with a sharp snap.

In an instant Tarzan was upon his feet, and for the second time that
day Clayton heard the bull ape's savage roar of victory.  Then he heard
Jane's agonized cry:

"Cecil--Mr. Clayton!  Oh, what is it?  What is it?"

Running quickly to the cabin door, Clayton called out that all was
right, and shouted to her to open the door.  As quickly as she could
she raised the great bar and fairly dragged Clayton within.

"What was that awful noise?" she whispered, shrinking close to him.

"It was the cry of the kill from the throat of the man who has just
saved your life, Miss Porter.  Wait, I will fetch him so you may thank
him."

The frightened girl would not be left alone, so she accompanied Clayton
to the side of the cabin where lay the dead body of the lioness.

Tarzan of the Apes was gone.

Clayton called several times, but there was no reply, and so the two
returned to the greater safety of the interior.

"What a frightful sound!" cried Jane, "I shudder at the mere thought of
it.  Do not tell me that a human throat voiced that hideous and
fearsome shriek."

"But it did, Miss Porter," replied Clayton; "or at least if not a human
throat that of a forest god."

And then he told her of his experiences with this strange creature--of
how twice the wild man had saved his life--of the wondrous strength,
and agility, and bravery--of the brown skin and the handsome face.

"I cannot make it out at all," he concluded.  "At first I thought he
might be Tarzan of the Apes; but he neither speaks nor understands
English, so that theory is untenable."

"Well, whatever he may be," cried the girl, "we owe him our lives, and
may God bless him and keep him in safety in his wild and savage jungle!"

"Amen," said Clayton, fervently.

"For the good Lord's sake, ain't I dead?"

The two turned to see Esmeralda sitting upright upon the floor, her
great eyes rolling from side to side as though she could not believe
their testimony as to her whereabouts.

And now, for Jane Porter, the reaction came, and she threw herself upon
the bench, sobbing with hysterical laughter.




Chapter XVI

"Most Remarkable"


Several miles south of the cabin, upon a strip of sandy beach, stood
two old men, arguing.

Before them stretched the broad Atlantic.  At their backs was the Dark
Continent.  Close around them loomed the impenetrable blackness of the
jungle.

Savage beasts roared and growled; noises, hideous and weird, assailed
their ears.  They had wandered for miles in search of their camp, but
always in the wrong direction.  They were as hopelessly lost as though
they suddenly had been transported to another world.

At such a time, indeed, every fiber of their combined intellects must
have been concentrated upon the vital question of the minute--the
life-and-death question to them of retracing their steps to camp.

Samuel T. Philander was speaking.

"But, my dear professor," he was saying, "I still maintain that but for
the victories of Ferdinand and Isabella over the fifteenth-century
Moors in Spain the world would be today a thousand years in advance of
where we now find ourselves.  The Moors were essentially a tolerant,
broad-minded, liberal race of agriculturists, artisans and
merchants--the very type of people that has made possible such
civilization as we find today in America and Europe--while the
Spaniards--"

"Tut, tut, dear Mr. Philander," interrupted Professor Porter; "their
religion positively precluded the possibilities you suggest.  Moslemism
was, is, and always will be, a blight on that scientific progress which
has marked--"

"Bless me!  Professor," interjected Mr. Philander, who had turned his
gaze toward the jungle, "there seems to be someone approaching."

Professor Archimedes Q. Porter turned in the direction indicated by the
nearsighted Mr. Philander.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," he chided.  "How often must I urge you to
seek that absolute concentration of your mental faculties which alone
may permit you to bring to bear the highest powers of intellectuality
upon the momentous problems which naturally fall to the lot of great
minds?  And now I find you guilty of a most flagrant breach of courtesy
in interrupting my learned discourse to call attention to a mere
quadruped of the genus FELIS.  As I was saying, Mr.--"

"Heavens, Professor, a lion?" cried Mr. Philander, straining his weak
eyes toward the dim figure outlined against the dark tropical
underbrush.

"Yes, yes, Mr. Philander, if you insist upon employing slang in your
discourse, a 'lion.'  But as I was saying--"

"Bless me, Professor," again interrupted Mr. Philander; "permit me to
suggest that doubtless the Moors who were conquered in the fifteenth
century will continue in that most regrettable condition for the time
being at least, even though we postpone discussion of that world
calamity until we may attain the enchanting view of yon FELIS CARNIVORA
which distance proverbially is credited with lending."

In the meantime the lion had approached with quiet dignity to within
ten paces of the two men, where he stood curiously watching them.

The moonlight flooded the beach, and the strange group stood out in
bold relief against the yellow sand.

"Most reprehensible, most reprehensible," exclaimed Professor Porter,
with a faint trace of irritation in his voice.  "Never, Mr. Philander,
never before in my life have I known one of these animals to be
permitted to roam at large from its cage.  I shall most certainly
report this outrageous breach of ethics to the directors of the
adjacent zoological garden."

"Quite right, Professor," agreed Mr. Philander, "and the sooner it is
done the better.  Let us start now."

Seizing the professor by the arm, Mr. Philander set off in the
direction that would put the greatest distance between themselves and
the lion.

They had proceeded but a short distance when a backward glance revealed
to the horrified gaze of Mr. Philander that the lion was following
them.  He tightened his grip upon the protesting professor and
increased his speed.

"As I was saying, Mr. Philander," repeated Professor Porter.

Mr. Philander took another hasty glance rearward.  The lion also had
quickened his gait, and was doggedly maintaining an unvarying distance
behind them.

"He is following us!" gasped Mr. Philander, breaking into a run.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," remonstrated the professor, "this unseemly
haste is most unbecoming to men of letters.  What will our friends
think of us, who may chance to be upon the street and witness our
frivolous antics?  Pray let us proceed with more decorum."

Mr. Philander stole another observation astern.

The lion was bounding along in easy leaps scarce five paces behind.

Mr. Philander dropped the professor's arm, and broke into a mad orgy of
speed that would have done credit to any varsity track team.

"As I was saying, Mr. Philander--" screamed Professor Porter, as,
metaphorically speaking, he himself "threw her into high."  He, too,
had caught a fleeting backward glimpse of cruel yellow eyes and half
open mouth within startling proximity of his person.

With streaming coat tails and shiny silk hat Professor Archimedes Q.
Porter fled through the moonlight close upon the heels of Mr. Samuel T.
Philander.

Before them a point of the jungle ran out toward a narrow promontory,
and it was for the heaven of the trees he saw there that Mr. Samuel T.
Philander directed his prodigious leaps and bounds; while from the
shadows of this same spot peered two keen eyes in interested
appreciation of the race.

It was Tarzan of the Apes who watched, with face a-grin, this odd game
of follow-the-leader.

He knew the two men were safe enough from attack in so far as the lion
was concerned.  The very fact that Numa had foregone such easy prey at
all convinced the wise forest craft of Tarzan that Numa's belly already
was full.

The lion might stalk them until hungry again; but the chances were that
if not angered he would soon tire of the sport, and slink away to his
jungle lair.

Really, the one great danger was that one of the men might stumble and
fall, and then the yellow devil would be upon him in a moment and the
joy of the kill would be too great a temptation to withstand.

So Tarzan swung quickly to a lower limb in line with the approaching
fugitives; and as Mr. Samuel T. Philander came panting and blowing
beneath him, already too spent to struggle up to the safety of the
limb, Tarzan reached down and, grasping him by the collar of his coat,
yanked him to the limb by his side.

Another moment brought the professor within the sphere of the friendly
grip, and he, too, was drawn upward to safety just as the baffled Numa,
with a roar, leaped to recover his vanishing quarry.

For a moment the two men clung panting to the great branch, while
Tarzan squatted with his back to the stem of the tree, watching them
with mingled curiosity and amusement.

It was the professor who first broke the silence.

"I am deeply pained, Mr. Philander, that you should have evinced such a
paucity of manly courage in the presence of one of the lower orders,
and by your crass timidity have caused me to exert myself to such an
unaccustomed degree in order that I might resume my discourse.  As I
was saying, Mr. Philander, when you interrupted me, the Moors--"

"Professor Archimedes Q. Porter," broke in Mr. Philander, in icy tones,
"the time has arrived when patience becomes a crime and mayhem appears
garbed in the mantle of virtue.  You have accused me of cowardice.  You
have insinuated that you ran only to overtake me, not to escape the
clutches of the lion.  Have a care, Professor Archimedes Q. Porter!  I
am a desperate man.  Goaded by long-suffering patience the worm will
turn."

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut!" cautioned Professor Porter; "you
forget yourself."

"I forget nothing as yet, Professor Archimedes Q. Porter; but, believe
me, sir, I am tottering on the verge of forgetfulness as to your
exalted position in the world of science, and your gray hairs."

The professor sat in silence for a few minutes, and the darkness hid
the grim smile that wreathed his wrinkled countenance.  Presently he
spoke.

"Look here, Skinny Philander," he said, in belligerent tones, "if you
are lookin' for a scrap, peel off your coat and come on down on the
ground, and I'll punch your head just as I did sixty years ago in the
alley back of Porky Evans' barn."

"Ark!" gasped the astonished Mr. Philander.  "Lordy, how good that
sounds!  When you're human, Ark, I love you; but somehow it seems as
though you had forgotten how to be human for the last twenty years."

The professor reached out a thin, trembling old hand through the
darkness until it found his old friend's shoulder.

"Forgive me, Skinny," he said, softly.  "It hasn't been quite twenty
years, and God alone knows how hard I have tried to be 'human' for
Jane's sake, and yours, too, since He took my other Jane away."

Another old hand stole up from Mr. Philander's side to clasp the one
that lay upon his shoulder, and no other message could better have
translated the one heart to the other.

They did not speak for some minutes.  The lion below them paced
nervously back and forth.  The third figure in the tree was hidden by
the dense shadows near the stem.  He, too, was silent--motionless as a
graven image.

"You certainly pulled me up into this tree just in time," said the
professor at last.  "I want to thank you.  You saved my life."

"But I didn't pull you up here, Professor," said Mr. Philander.  "Bless
me!  The excitement of the moment quite caused me to forget that I
myself was drawn up here by some outside agency--there must be someone
or something in this tree with us."

"Eh?" ejaculated Professor Porter.  "Are you quite positive, Mr.
Philander?"

"Most positive, Professor," replied Mr. Philander, "and," he added, "I
think we should thank the party.  He may be sitting right next to you
now, Professor."

"Eh?  What's that?  Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut!" said Professor
Porter, edging cautiously nearer to Mr. Philander.

Just then it occurred to Tarzan of the Apes that Numa had loitered
beneath the tree for a sufficient length of time, so he raised his
young head toward the heavens, and there rang out upon the terrified
ears of the two old men the awful warning challenge of the anthropoid.

The two friends, huddled trembling in their precarious position on the
limb, saw the great lion halt in his restless pacing as the
blood-curdling cry smote his ears, and then slink quickly into the
jungle, to be instantly lost to view.

"Even the lion trembles in fear," whispered Mr. Philander.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," murmured Professor Porter,
clutching frantically at Mr. Philander to regain the balance which the
sudden fright had so perilously endangered.  Unfortunately for them
both, Mr. Philander's center of equilibrium was at that very moment
hanging upon the ragged edge of nothing, so that it needed but the
gentle impetus supplied by the additional weight of Professor Porter's
body to topple the devoted secretary from the limb.

For a moment they swayed uncertainly, and then, with mingled and most
unscholarly shrieks, they pitched headlong from the tree, locked in
frenzied embrace.

It was quite some moments ere either moved, for both were positive that
any such attempt would reveal so many breaks and fractures as to make
further progress impossible.

At length Professor Porter made an attempt to move one leg.  To his
surprise, it responded to his will as in days gone by.  He now drew up
its mate and stretched it forth again.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," he murmured.

"Thank God, Professor," whispered Mr. Philander, fervently, "you are
not dead, then?"

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut," cautioned Professor Porter, "I do
not know with accuracy as yet."

With infinite solicitude Professor Porter wiggled his right arm--joy!
It was intact.  Breathlessly he waved his left arm above his prostrate
body--it waved!

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," he said.

"To whom are you signaling, Professor?" asked Mr. Philander, in an
excited tone.

Professor Porter deigned to make no response to this puerile inquiry.
Instead he raised his head gently from the ground, nodding it back and
forth a half dozen times.

"Most remarkable," he breathed.  "It remains intact."

Mr. Philander had not moved from where he had fallen; he had not dared
the attempt.  How indeed could one move when one's arms and legs and
back were broken?

One eye was buried in the soft loam; the other, rolling sidewise, was
fixed in awe upon the strange gyrations of Professor Porter.

"How sad!" exclaimed Mr. Philander, half aloud.  "Concussion of the
brain, superinducing total mental aberration.  How very sad indeed! and
for one still so young!"

Professor Porter rolled over upon his stomach; gingerly he bowed his
back until he resembled a huge tom cat in proximity to a yelping dog.
Then he sat up and felt of various portions of his anatomy.

"They are all here," he exclaimed.  "Most remarkable!"

Whereupon he arose, and, bending a scathing glance upon the still
prostrate form of Mr. Samuel T. Philander, he said:

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander; this is no time to indulge in slothful ease.
We must be up and doing."

Mr. Philander lifted his other eye out of the mud and gazed in
speechless rage at Professor Porter.  Then he attempted to rise; nor
could there have been any more surprised than he when his efforts were
immediately crowned with marked success.

He was still bursting with rage, however, at the cruel injustice of
Professor Porter's insinuation, and was on the point of rendering a
tart rejoinder when his eyes fell upon a strange figure standing a few
paces away, scrutinizing them intently.

Professor Porter had recovered his shiny silk hat, which he had brushed
carefully upon the sleeve of his coat and replaced upon his head.  When
he saw Mr. Philander pointing to something behind him he turned to
behold a giant, naked but for a loin cloth and a few metal ornaments,
standing motionless before him.

"Good evening, sir!" said the professor, lifting his hat.

For reply the giant motioned them to follow him, and set off up the
beach in the direction from which they had recently come.

"I think it the better part of discretion to follow him," said Mr.
Philander.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," returned the professor.  "A short time since
you were advancing a most logical argument in substantiation of your
theory that camp lay directly south of us.  I was skeptical, but you
finally convinced me; so now I am positive that toward the south we
must travel to reach our friends.  Therefore I shall continue south."

"But, Professor Porter, this man may know better than either of us.  He
seems to be indigenous to this part of the world.  Let us at least
follow him for a short distance."

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," repeated the professor.  "I am a difficult
man to convince, but when once convinced my decision is unalterable.  I
shall continue in the proper direction, if I have to circumambulate the
continent of Africa to reach my destination."

Further argument was interrupted by Tarzan, who, seeing that these
strange men were not following him, had returned to their side.

Again he beckoned to them; but still they stood in argument.

Presently the ape-man lost patience with their stupid ignorance.  He
grasped the frightened Mr. Philander by the shoulder, and before that
worthy gentleman knew whether he was being killed or merely maimed for
life, Tarzan had tied one end of his rope securely about Mr.
Philander's neck.

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander," remonstrated Professor Porter; "it is most
unbeseeming in you to submit to such indignities."

But scarcely were the words out of his mouth ere he, too, had been
seized and securely bound by the neck with the same rope.  Then Tarzan
set off toward the north, leading the now thoroughly frightened
professor and his secretary.

In deathly silence they proceeded for what seemed hours to the two
tired and hopeless old men; but presently as they topped a little rise
of ground they were overjoyed to see the cabin lying before them, not a
hundred yards distant.

Here Tarzan released them, and, pointing toward the little building,
vanished into the jungle beside them.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable!" gasped the professor.  "But you
see, Mr. Philander, that I was quite right, as usual; and but for your
stubborn willfulness we should have escaped a series of most
humiliating, not to say dangerous accidents.  Pray allow yourself to be
guided by a more mature and practical mind hereafter when in need of
wise counsel."

Mr. Samuel T. Philander was too much relieved at the happy outcome to
their adventure to take umbrage at the professor's cruel fling.
Instead he grasped his friend's arm and hastened him forward in the
direction of the cabin.

It was a much-relieved party of castaways that found itself once more
united.  Dawn discovered them still recounting their various adventures
and speculating upon the identity of the strange guardian and protector
they had found on this savage shore.

Esmeralda was positive that it was none other than an angel of the
Lord, sent down especially to watch over them.

"Had you seen him devour the raw meat of the lion, Esmeralda," laughed
Clayton, "you would have thought him a very material angel."

"There was nothing heavenly about his voice," said Jane Porter, with a
little shudder at recollection of the awful roar which had followed the
killing of the lioness.

"Nor did it precisely comport with my preconceived ideas of the dignity
of divine messengers," remarked Professor Porter, "when
the--ah--gentleman tied two highly respectable and erudite scholars
neck to neck and dragged them through the jungle as though they had
been cows."




Chapter XVII

Burials


As it was now quite light, the party, none of whom had eaten or slept
since the previous morning, began to bestir themselves to prepare food.

The mutineers of the Arrow had landed a small supply of dried meats,
canned soups and vegetables, crackers, flour, tea, and coffee for the
five they had marooned, and these were hurriedly drawn upon to satisfy
the craving of long-famished appetites.

The next task was to make the cabin habitable, and to this end it was
decided to at once remove the gruesome relics of the tragedy which had
taken place there on some bygone day.

Professor Porter and Mr. Philander were deeply interested in examining
the skeletons.  The two larger, they stated, had belonged to a male and
female of one of the higher white races.

The smallest skeleton was given but passing attention, as its location,
in the crib, left no doubt as to its having been the infant offspring
of this unhappy couple.

As they were preparing the skeleton of the man for burial, Clayton
discovered a massive ring which had evidently encircled the man's
finger at the time of his death, for one of the slender bones of the
hand still lay within the golden bauble.

Picking it up to examine it, Clayton gave a cry of astonishment, for
the ring bore the crest of the house of Greystoke.

At the same time, Jane discovered the books in the cupboard, and on
opening the fly-leaf of one of them saw the name, JOHN CLAYTON, LONDON.
In a second book which she hurriedly examined was the single name,
GREYSTOKE.

"Why, Mr. Clayton," she cried, "what does this mean?  Here are the
names of some of your own people in these books."

"And here," he replied gravely, "is the great ring of the house of
Greystoke which has been lost since my uncle, John Clayton, the former
Lord Greystoke, disappeared, presumably lost at sea."

"But how do you account for these things being here, in this savage
African jungle?" exclaimed the girl.

"There is but one way to account for it, Miss Porter," said Clayton.
"The late Lord Greystoke was not drowned.  He died here in this cabin
and this poor thing upon the floor is all that is mortal of him."

"Then this must have been Lady Greystoke," said Jane reverently,
indicating the poor mass of bones upon the bed.

"The beautiful Lady Alice," replied Clayton, "of whose many virtues and
remarkable personal charms I often have heard my mother and father
speak.  Poor woman," he murmured sadly.

With deep reverence and solemnity the bodies of the late Lord and Lady
Greystoke were buried beside their little African cabin, and between
them was placed the tiny skeleton of the baby of Kala, the ape.

As Mr. Philander was placing the frail bones of the infant in a bit of
sail cloth, he examined the skull minutely.  Then he called Professor
Porter to his side, and the two argued in low tones for several minutes.

"Most remarkable, most remarkable," said Professor Porter.

"Bless me," said Mr. Philander, "we must acquaint Mr. Clayton with our
discovery at once."

"Tut, tut, Mr. Philander, tut, tut!" remonstrated Professor Archimedes
Q. Porter.  "'Let the dead past bury its dead.'"

And so the white-haired old man repeated the burial service over this
strange grave, while his four companions stood with bowed and uncovered
heads about him.

From the trees Tarzan of the Apes watched the solemn ceremony; but most
of all he watched the sweet face and graceful figure of Jane Porter.

In his savage, untutored breast new emotions were stirring.  He could
not fathom them.  He wondered why he felt so great an interest in these
people--why he had gone to such pains to save the three men.  But he
did not wonder why he had torn Sabor from the tender flesh of the
strange girl.

Surely the men were stupid and ridiculous and cowardly.  Even Manu, the
monkey, was more intelligent than they.  If these were creatures of his
own kind he was doubtful if his past pride in blood was warranted.

But the girl, ah--that was a different matter.  He did not reason here.
He knew that she was created to be protected, and that he was created
to protect her.

He wondered why they had dug a great hole in the ground merely to bury
dry bones.  Surely there was no sense in that; no one wanted to steal
dry bones.

Had there been meat upon them he could have understood, for thus alone
might one keep his meat from Dango, the hyena, and the other robbers of
the jungle.

When the grave had been filled with earth the little party turned back
toward the cabin, and Esmeralda, still weeping copiously for the two
she had never heard of before today, and who had been dead twenty
years, chanced to glance toward the harbor.  Instantly her tears ceased.

"Look at them low down white trash out there!" she shrilled, pointing
toward the Arrow.  "They-all's a desecrating us, right here on this
here perverted island."

And, sure enough, the Arrow was being worked toward the open sea,
slowly, through the harbor's entrance.

"They promised to leave us firearms and ammunition," said Clayton.
"The merciless beasts!"

"It is the work of that fellow they call Snipes, I am sure," said Jane.
"King was a scoundrel, but he had a little sense of humanity.  If they
had not killed him I know that he would have seen that we were properly
provided for before they left us to our fate."

"I regret that they did not visit us before sailing," said Professor
Porter.  "I had proposed requesting them to leave the treasure with us,
as I shall be a ruined man if that is lost."

Jane looked at her father sadly.

"Never mind, dear," she said.  "It wouldn't have done any good, because
it is solely for the treasure that they killed their officers and
landed us upon this awful shore."

"Tut, tut, child, tut, tut!" replied Professor Porter.  "You are a good
child, but inexperienced in practical matters," and Professor Porter
turned and walked slowly away toward the jungle, his hands clasped
beneath his long coat tails and his eyes bent upon the ground.

His daughter watched him with a pathetic smile upon her lips, and then
turning to Mr. Philander, she whispered:

"Please don't let him wander off again as he did yesterday.  We depend
upon you, you know, to keep a close watch upon him."

"He becomes more difficult to handle each day," replied Mr. Philander,
with a sigh and a shake of his head.  "I presume he is now off to
report to the directors of the Zoo that one of their lions was at large
last night.  Oh, Miss Jane, you don't know what I have to contend with."

"Yes, I do, Mr. Philander; but while we all love him, you alone are
best fitted to manage him; for, regardless of what he may say to you,
he respects your great learning, and, therefore, has immense confidence
in your judgment.  The poor dear cannot differentiate between erudition
and wisdom."

Mr. Philander, with a mildly puzzled expression on his face, turned to
pursue Professor Porter, and in his mind he was revolving the question
of whether he should feel complimented or aggrieved at Miss Porter's
rather backhanded compliment.

Tarzan had seen the consternation depicted upon the faces of the little
group as they witnessed the departure of the Arrow; so, as the ship was
a wonderful novelty to him in addition, he determined to hasten out to
the point of land at the north of the harbor's mouth and obtain a
nearer view of the boat, as well as to learn, if possible, the
direction of its flight.

Swinging through the trees with great speed, he reached the point only
a moment after the ship had passed out of the harbor, so that he
obtained an excellent view of the wonders of this strange, floating
house.

There were some twenty men running hither and thither about the deck,
pulling and hauling on ropes.

A light land breeze was blowing, and the ship had been worked through
the harbor's mouth under scant sail, but now that they had cleared the
point every available shred of canvas was being spread that she might
stand out to sea as handily as possible.

Tarzan watched the graceful movements of the ship in rapt admiration,
and longed to be aboard her.  Presently his keen eyes caught the
faintest suspicion of smoke on the far northern horizon, and he
wondered over the cause of such a thing out on the great water.

About the same time the look-out on the Arrow must have discerned it,
for in a few minutes Tarzan saw the sails being shifted and shortened.
The ship came about, and presently he knew that she was beating back
toward land.

A man at the bows was constantly heaving into the sea a rope to the end
of which a small object was fastened.  Tarzan wondered what the purpose
of this action might be.

At last the ship came up directly into the wind; the anchor was
lowered; down came the sails.  There was great scurrying about on deck.

A boat was lowered, and in it a great chest was placed.  Then a dozen
sailors bent to the oars and pulled rapidly toward the point where
Tarzan crouched in the branches of a tree.

In the stern of the boat, as it drew nearer, Tarzan saw the rat-faced
man.

It was but a few minutes later that the boat touched the beach.  The
men jumped out and lifted the great chest to the sand.  They were on
the north side of the point so that their presence was concealed from
those at the cabin.

The men argued angrily for a moment.  Then the rat-faced one, with
several companions, ascended the low bluff on which stood the tree that
concealed Tarzan.  They looked about for several minutes.

"Here is a good place," said the rat-faced sailor, indicating a spot
beneath Tarzan's tree.

"It is as good as any," replied one of his companions.  "If they catch
us with the treasure aboard it will all be confiscated anyway.  We
might as well bury it here on the chance that some of us will escape
the gallows to come back and enjoy it later."

The rat-faced one now called to the men who had remained at the boat,
and they came slowly up the bank carrying picks and shovels.

"Hurry, you!" cried Snipes.

"Stow it!" retorted one of the men, in a surly tone.  "You're no
admiral, you damned shrimp."

"I'm Cap'n here, though, I'll have you to understand, you swab,"
shrieked Snipes, with a volley of frightful oaths.

"Steady, boys," cautioned one of the men who had not spoken before.
"It ain't goin' to get us nothing by fightin' amongst ourselves."

"Right enough," replied the sailor who had resented Snipes' autocratic
tones; "but it ain't a-goin' to get nobody nothin' to put on airs in
this bloomin' company neither."

"You fellows dig here," said Snipes, indicating a spot beneath the
tree.  "And while you're diggin', Peter kin be a-makin' of a map of the
location so's we kin find it again.  You, Tom, and Bill, take a couple
more down and fetch up the chest."

"Wot are you a-goin' to do?" asked he of the previous altercation.
"Just boss?"

"Git busy there," growled Snipes.  "You didn't think your Cap'n was
a-goin' to dig with a shovel, did you?"

The men all looked up angrily.  None of them liked Snipes, and this
disagreeable show of authority since he had murdered King, the real
head and ringleader of the mutineers, had only added fuel to the flames
of their hatred.

"Do you mean to say that you don't intend to take a shovel, and lend a
hand with this work?  Your shoulder's not hurt so all-fired bad as
that," said Tarrant, the sailor who had before spoken.

"Not by a damned sight," replied Snipes, fingering the butt of his
revolver nervously.

"Then, by God," replied Tarrant, "if you won't take a shovel you'll
take a pickax."

With the words he raised his pick above his head, and, with a mighty
blow, he buried the point in Snipes' brain.

For a moment the men stood silently looking at the result of their
fellow's grim humor.  Then one of them spoke.

"Served the skunk jolly well right," he said.

One of the others commenced to ply his pick to the ground.  The soil
was soft and he threw aside the pick and grasped a shovel; then the
others joined him.  There was no further comment on the killing, but
the men worked in a better frame of mind than they had since Snipes had
assumed command.

When they had a trench of ample size to bury the chest, Tarrant
suggested that they enlarge it and inter Snipes' body on top of the
chest.

"It might 'elp fool any as 'appened to be diggin' 'ereabouts," he
explained.

The others saw the cunning of the suggestion, and so the trench was
lengthened to accommodate the corpse, and in the center a deeper hole
was excavated for the box, which was first wrapped in sailcloth and
then lowered to its place, which brought its top about a foot below the
bottom of the grave.  Earth was shovelled in and tramped down about the
chest until the bottom of the grave showed level and uniform.

Two of the men rolled the rat-faced corpse unceremoniously into the
grave, after first stripping it of its weapons and various other
articles which the several members of the party coveted for their own.

They then filled the grave with earth and tramped upon it until it
would hold no more.

The balance of the loose earth was thrown far and wide, and a mass of
dead undergrowth spread in as natural a manner as possible over the
new-made grave to obliterate all signs of the ground having been
disturbed.

Their work done the sailors returned to the small boat, and pulled off
rapidly toward the Arrow.

The breeze had increased considerably, and as the smoke upon the
horizon was now plainly discernible in considerable volume, the
mutineers lost no time in getting under full sail and bearing away
toward the southwest.

Tarzan, an interested spectator of all that had taken place, sat
speculating on the strange actions of these peculiar creatures.

Men were indeed more foolish and more cruel than the beasts of the
jungle!  How fortunate was he who lived in the peace and security of
the great forest!

Tarzan wondered what the chest they had buried contained.  If they did
not want it why did they not merely throw it into the water?  That
would have been much easier.

Ah, he thought, but they do want it.  They have hidden it here because
they intend returning for it later.

Tarzan dropped to the ground and commenced to examine the earth about
the excavation.  He was looking to see if these creatures had dropped
anything which he might like to own.  Soon he discovered a spade hidden
by the underbrush which they had laid upon the grave.

He seized it and attempted to use it as he had seen the sailors do.  It
was awkward work and hurt his bare feet, but he persevered until he had
partially uncovered the body.  This he dragged from the grave and laid
to one side.

Then he continued digging until he had unearthed the chest.  This also
he dragged to the side of the corpse.  Then he filled in the smaller
hole below the grave, replaced the body and the earth around and above
it, covered it over with underbrush, and returned to the chest.

Four sailors had sweated beneath the burden of its weight--Tarzan of
the Apes picked it up as though it had been an empty packing case, and
with the spade slung to his back by a piece of rope, carried it off
into the densest part of the jungle.

He could not well negotiate the trees with his awkward burden, but he
kept to the trails, and so made fairly good time.

For several hours he traveled a little north of east until he came to
an impenetrable wall of matted and tangled vegetation.  Then he took to
the lower branches, and in another fifteen minutes he emerged into the
amphitheater of the apes, where they met in council, or to celebrate
the rites of the Dum-Dum.

Near the center of the clearing, and not far from the drum, or altar,
he commenced to dig.  This was harder work than turning up the freshly
excavated earth at the grave, but Tarzan of the Apes was persevering
and so he kept at his labor until he was rewarded by seeing a hole
sufficiently deep to receive the chest and effectually hide it from
view.

Why had he gone to all this labor without knowing the value of the
contents of the chest?

Tarzan of the Apes had a man's figure and a man's brain, but he was an
ape by training and environment.  His brain told him that the chest
contained something valuable, or the men would not have hidden it.  His
training had taught him to imitate whatever was new and unusual, and
now the natural curiosity, which is as common to men as to apes,
prompted him to open the chest and examine its contents.

But the heavy lock and massive iron bands baffled both his cunning and
his immense strength, so that he was compelled to bury the chest
without having his curiosity satisfied.

By the time Tarzan had hunted his way back to the vicinity of the
cabin, feeding as he went, it was quite dark.

Within the little building a light was burning, for Clayton had found
an unopened tin of oil which had stood intact for twenty years, a part
of the supplies left with the Claytons by Black Michael.  The lamps
also were still useable, and thus the interior of the cabin appeared as
bright as day to the astonished Tarzan.

He had often wondered at the exact purpose of the lamps.  His reading
and the pictures had told him what they were, but he had no idea of how
they could be made to produce the wondrous sunlight that some of his
pictures had portrayed them as diffusing upon all surrounding objects.

As he approached the window nearest the door he saw that the cabin had
been divided into two rooms by a rough partition of boughs and
sailcloth.

In the front room were the three men; the two older deep in argument,
while the younger, tilted back against the wall on an improvised stool,
was deeply engrossed in reading one of Tarzan's books.

Tarzan was not particularly interested in the men, however, so he
sought the other window.  There was the girl.  How beautiful her
features!  How delicate her snowy skin!

She was writing at Tarzan's own table beneath the window.  Upon a pile
of grasses at the far side of the room lay the Negress asleep.

For an hour Tarzan feasted his eyes upon her while she wrote.  How he
longed to speak to her, but he dared not attempt it, for he was
convinced that, like the young man, she would not understand him, and
he feared, too, that he might frighten her away.

At length she arose, leaving her manuscript upon the table.  She went
to the bed upon which had been spread several layers of soft grasses.
These she rearranged.

Then she loosened the soft mass of golden hair which crowned her head.
Like a shimmering waterfall turned to burnished metal by a dying sun it
fell about her oval face; in waving lines, below her waist it tumbled.

Tarzan was spellbound.  Then she extinguished the lamp and all within
the cabin was wrapped in Cimmerian darkness.

Still Tarzan watched.  Creeping close beneath the window he waited,
listening, for half an hour.  At last he was rewarded by the sounds of
the regular breathing within which denotes sleep.

Cautiously he intruded his hand between the meshes of the lattice until
his whole arm was within the cabin.  Carefully he felt upon the desk.
At last he grasped the manuscript upon which Jane Porter had been
writing, and as cautiously withdrew his arm and hand, holding the
precious treasure.

Tarzan folded the sheets into a small parcel which he tucked into the
quiver with his arrows.  Then he melted away into the jungle as softly
and as noiselessly as a shadow.




Chapter XVIII

The Jungle Toll


Early the following morning Tarzan awoke, and his first thought of the
new day, as the last of yesterday, was of the wonderful writing which
lay hidden in his quiver.

Hurriedly he brought it forth, hoping against hope that he could read
what the beautiful white girl had written there the preceding evening.

At the first glance he suffered a bitter disappointment; never before
had he so yearned for anything as now he did for the ability to
interpret a message from that golden-haired divinity who had come so
suddenly and so unexpectedly into his life.

What did it matter if the message were not intended for him?  It was an
expression of her thoughts, and that was sufficient for Tarzan of the
Apes.

And now to be baffled by strange, uncouth characters the like of which
he had never seen before!  Why, they even tipped in the opposite
direction from all that he had ever examined either in printed books or
the difficult script of the few letters he had found.

Even the little bugs of the black book were familiar friends, though
their arrangement meant nothing to him; but these bugs were new and
unheard of.

For twenty minutes he pored over them, when suddenly they commenced to
take familiar though distorted shapes.  Ah, they were his old friends,
but badly crippled.

Then he began to make out a word here and a word there.  His heart
leaped for joy.  He could read it, and he would.

In another half hour he was progressing rapidly, and, but for an
exceptional word now and again, he found it very plain sailing.

Here is what he read:

WEST COAST OF AFRICA, ABOUT 10 DEGREES SOUTH
      LATITUDE.  (So Mr. Clayton says.)
                  February 3 (?), 1909.

DEAREST HAZEL:

It seems foolish to write you a letter that you may never see, but I
simply must tell somebody of our awful experiences since we sailed from
Europe on the ill-fated Arrow.

If we never return to civilization, as now seems only too likely, this
will at least prove a brief record of the events which led up to our
final fate, whatever it may be.

As you know, we were supposed to have set out upon a scientific
expedition to the Congo.  Papa was presumed to entertain some wondrous
theory of an unthinkably ancient civilization, the remains of which lay
buried somewhere in the Congo valley.  But after we were well under
sail the truth came out.

It seems that an old bookworm who has a book and curio shop in
Baltimore discovered between the leaves of a very old Spanish
manuscript a letter written in 1550 detailing the adventures of a crew
of mutineers of a Spanish galleon bound from Spain to South America
with a vast treasure of "doubloons" and "pieces of eight," I suppose,
for they certainly sound weird and piraty.

The writer had been one of the crew, and the letter was to his son, who
was, at the very time the letter was written, master of a Spanish
merchantman.

Many years had elapsed since the events the letter narrated had
transpired, and the old man had become a respected citizen of an
obscure Spanish town, but the love of gold was still so strong upon him
that he risked all to acquaint his son with the means of attaining
fabulous wealth for them both.

The writer told how when but a week out from Spain the crew had
mutinied and murdered every officer and man who opposed them; but they
defeated their own ends by this very act, for there was none left
competent to navigate a ship at sea.

They were blown hither and thither for two months, until sick and dying
of scurvy, starvation, and thirst, they had been wrecked on a small
islet.

The galleon was washed high upon the beach where she went to pieces;
but not before the survivors, who numbered but ten souls, had rescued
one of the great chests of treasure.

This they buried well up on the island, and for three years they lived
there in constant hope of being rescued.

One by one they sickened and died, until only one man was left, the
writer of the letter.

The men had built a boat from the wreckage of the galleon, but having
no idea where the island was located they had not dared to put to sea.

When all were dead except himself, however, the awful loneliness so
weighed upon the mind of the sole survivor that he could endure it no
longer, and choosing to risk death upon the open sea rather than
madness on the lonely isle, he set sail in his little boat after nearly
a year of solitude.

Fortunately he sailed due north, and within a week was in the track of
the Spanish merchantmen plying between the West Indies and Spain, and
was picked up by one of these vessels homeward bound.

The story he told was merely one of shipwreck in which all but a few
had perished, the balance, except himself, dying after they reached the
island.  He did not mention the mutiny or the chest of buried treasure.

The master of the merchantman assured him that from the position at
which they had picked him up, and the prevailing winds for the past
week he could have been on no other island than one of the Cape Verde
group, which lie off the West Coast of Africa in about 16 degrees or 17
degrees north latitude.

His letter described the island minutely, as well as the location of
the treasure, and was accompanied by the crudest, funniest little old
map you ever saw; with trees and rocks all marked by scrawly X's to
show the exact spot where the treasure had been buried.

When papa explained the real nature of the expedition, my heart sank,
for I know so well how visionary and impractical the poor dear has
always been that I feared that he had again been duped; especially when
he told me he had paid a thousand dollars for the letter and map.

To add to my distress, I learned that he had borrowed ten thousand
dollars more from Robert Canler, and had given his notes for the amount.

Mr. Canler had asked for no security, and you know, dearie, what that
will mean for me if papa cannot meet them.  Oh, how I detest that man!

We all tried to look on the bright side of things, but Mr. Philander,
and Mr. Clayton--he joined us in London just for the adventure--both
felt as skeptical as I.

Well, to make a long story short, we found the island and the
treasure--a great iron-bound oak chest, wrapped in many layers of oiled
sailcloth, and as strong and firm as when it had been buried nearly two
hundred years ago.

It was SIMPLY FILLED with gold coin, and was so heavy that four men
bent underneath its weight.

The horrid thing seems to bring nothing but murder and misfortune to
those who have anything to do with it, for three days after we sailed
from the Cape Verde Islands our own crew mutinied and killed every one
of their officers.

Oh, it was the most terrifying experience one could imagine--I cannot
even write of it.

They were going to kill us too, but one of them, the leader, named
King, would not let them, and so they sailed south along the coast to a
lonely spot where they found a good harbor, and here they landed and
have left us.

They sailed away with the treasure to-day, but Mr. Clayton says they
will meet with a fate similar to the mutineers of the ancient galleon,
because King, the only man aboard who knew aught of navigation, was
murdered on the beach by one of the men the day we landed.

I wish you could know Mr. Clayton; he is the dearest fellow imaginable,
and unless I am mistaken he has fallen very much in love with me.

He is the only son of Lord Greystoke, and some day will inherit the
title and estates.  In addition, he is wealthy in his own right, but
the fact that he is going to be an English Lord makes me very sad--you
know what my sentiments have always been relative to American girls who
married titled foreigners.  Oh, if he were only a plain American
gentleman!

But it isn't his fault, poor fellow, and in everything except birth he
would do credit to my country, and that is the greatest compliment I
know how to pay any man.

We have had the most weird experiences since we were landed here.  Papa
and Mr. Philander lost in the jungle, and chased by a real lion.

Mr. Clayton lost, and attacked twice by wild beasts.  Esmeralda and I
cornered in an old cabin by a perfectly awful man-eating lioness.  Oh,
it was simply "terrifical," as Esmeralda would say.

But the strangest part of it all is the wonderful creature who rescued
us.  I have not seen him, but Mr. Clayton and papa and Mr. Philander
have, and they say that he is a perfectly god-like white man tanned to
a dusky brown, with the strength of a wild elephant, the agility of a
monkey, and the bravery of a lion.

He speaks no English and vanishes as quickly and as mysteriously after
he has performed some valorous deed, as though he were a disembodied
spirit.

Then we have another weird neighbor, who printed a beautiful sign in
English and tacked it on the door of his cabin, which we have
preempted, warning us to destroy none of his belongings, and signing
himself "Tarzan of the Apes."

We have never seen him, though we think he is about, for one of the
sailors, who was going to shoot Mr. Clayton in the back, received a
spear in his shoulder from some unseen hand in the jungle.

The sailors left us but a meager supply of food, so, as we have only a
single revolver with but three cartridges left in it, we do not know
how we can procure meat, though Mr. Philander says that we can exist
indefinitely on the wild fruit and nuts which abound in the jungle.

I am very tired now, so I shall go to my funny bed of grasses which Mr.
Clayton gathered for me, but will add to this from day to day as things
happen.
                              Lovingly,
                                  JANE PORTER.

TO HAZEL STRONG, BALTIMORE, MD.


Tarzan sat in a brown study for a long time after he finished reading
the letter.  It was filled with so many new and wonderful things that
his brain was in a whirl as he attempted to digest them all.

So they did not know that he was Tarzan of the Apes.  He would tell
them.

In his tree he had constructed a rude shelter of leaves and boughs,
beneath which, protected from the rain, he had placed the few treasures
brought from the cabin.  Among these were some pencils.

He took one, and beneath Jane Porter's signature he wrote:

      I am Tarzan of the Apes


He thought that would be sufficient.  Later he would return the letter
to the cabin.

In the matter of food, thought Tarzan, they had no need to worry--he
would provide, and he did.

The next morning Jane found her missing letter in the exact spot from
which it had disappeared two nights before.  She was mystified; but
when she saw the printed words beneath her signature, she felt a cold,
clammy chill run up her spine.  She showed the letter, or rather the
last sheet with the signature, to Clayton.

"And to think," she said, "that uncanny thing was probably watching me
all the time that I was writing--oo!  It makes me shudder just to think
of it."

"But he must be friendly," reassured Clayton, "for he has returned your
letter, nor did he offer to harm you, and unless I am mistaken he left
a very substantial memento of his friendship outside the cabin door
last night, for I just found the carcass of a wild boar there as I came
out."

From then on scarcely a day passed that did not bring its offering of
game or other food.  Sometimes it was a young deer, again a quantity of
strange, cooked food--cassava cakes pilfered from the village of
Mbonga--or a boar, or leopard, and once a lion.

Tarzan derived the greatest pleasure of his life in hunting meat for
these strangers.  It seemed to him that no pleasure on earth could
compare with laboring for the welfare and protection of the beautiful
white girl.

Some day he would venture into the camp in daylight and talk with these
people through the medium of the little bugs which were familiar to
them and to Tarzan.

But he found it difficult to overcome the timidity of the wild thing of
the forest, and so day followed day without seeing a fulfillment of his
good intentions.

The party in the camp, emboldened by familiarity, wandered farther and
yet farther into the jungle in search of nuts and fruit.

Scarcely a day passed that did not find Professor Porter straying in
his preoccupied indifference toward the jaws of death.  Mr. Samuel T.
Philander, never what one might call robust, was worn to the shadow of
a shadow through the ceaseless worry and mental distraction resultant
from his Herculean efforts to safeguard the professor.

A month passed.  Tarzan had finally determined to visit the camp by
daylight.

It was early afternoon.  Clayton had wandered to the point at the
harbor's mouth to look for passing vessels.  Here he kept a great mass
of wood, high piled, ready to be ignited as a signal should a steamer
or a sail top the far horizon.

Professor Porter was wandering along the beach south of the camp with
Mr. Philander at his elbow, urging him to turn his steps back before
the two became again the sport of some savage beast.

The others gone, Jane and Esmeralda had wandered into the jungle to
gather fruit, and in their search were led farther and farther from the
cabin.

Tarzan waited in silence before the door of the little house until they
should return.  His thoughts were of the beautiful white girl.  They
were always of her now.  He wondered if she would fear him, and the
thought all but caused him to relinquish his plan.

He was rapidly becoming impatient for her return, that he might feast
his eyes upon her and be near her, perhaps touch her.  The ape-man knew
no god, but he was as near to worshipping his divinity as mortal man
ever comes to worship.  While he waited he passed the time printing a
message to her; whether he intended giving it to her he himself could
not have told, but he took infinite pleasure in seeing his thoughts
expressed in print--in which he was not so uncivilized after all.  He
wrote:


I am Tarzan of the Apes.  I want you.  I am yours.  You are mine.  We
live here together always in my house.  I will bring you the best of
fruits, the tenderest deer, the finest meats that roam the jungle.  I
will hunt for you.  I am the greatest of the jungle fighters.  I will
fight for you.  I am the mightiest of the jungle fighters.  You are
Jane Porter, I saw it in your letter.  When you see this you will know
that it is for you and that Tarzan of the Apes loves you.


As he stood, straight as a young Indian, by the door, waiting after he
had finished the message, there came to his keen ears a familiar sound.
It was the passing of a great ape through the lower branches of the
forest.

For an instant he listened intently, and then from the jungle came the
agonized scream of a woman, and Tarzan of the Apes, dropping his first
love letter upon the ground, shot like a panther into the forest.

Clayton, also, heard the scream, and Professor Porter and Mr.
Philander, and in a few minutes they came panting to the cabin, calling
out to each other a volley of excited questions as they approached.  A
glance within confirmed their worst fears.

Jane and Esmeralda were not there.

Instantly, Clayton, followed by the two old men, plunged into the
jungle, calling the girl's name aloud.  For half an hour they stumbled
on, until Clayton, by merest chance, came upon the prostrate form of
Esmeralda.

He stopped beside her, feeling for her pulse and then listening for her
heartbeats.  She lived.  He shook her.

"Esmeralda!" he shrieked in her ear.  "Esmeralda!  For God's sake,
where is Miss Porter?  What has happened?  Esmeralda!"

Slowly Esmeralda opened her eyes.  She saw Clayton.  She saw the jungle
about her.

"Oh, Gaberelle!" she screamed, and fainted again.

By this time Professor Porter and Mr. Philander had come up.

"What shall we do, Mr. Clayton?" asked the old professor.  "Where shall
we look?  God could not have been so cruel as to take my little girl
away from me now."

"We must arouse Esmeralda first," replied Clayton.  "She can tell us
what has happened.  Esmeralda!" he cried again, shaking the black woman
roughly by the shoulder.

"O Gaberelle, I want to die!" cried the poor woman, but with eyes fast
closed.  "Let me die, dear Lord, don't let me see that awful face
again."

"Come, come, Esmeralda," cried Clayton.

"The Lord isn't here; it's Mr. Clayton.  Open your eyes."

Esmeralda did as she was bade.

"O Gaberelle!  Thank the Lord," she said.

"Where's Miss Porter?  What happened?" questioned Clayton.

"Ain't Miss Jane here?" cried Esmeralda, sitting up with wonderful
celerity for one of her bulk.  "Oh, Lord, now I remember!  It must have
took her away," and the Negress commenced to sob, and wail her
lamentations.

"What took her away?" cried Professor Porter.

"A great big giant all covered with hair."

"A gorilla, Esmeralda?" questioned Mr. Philander, and the three men
scarcely breathed as he voiced the horrible thought.

"I thought it was the devil; but I guess it must have been one of them
gorilephants.  Oh, my poor baby, my poor little honey," and again
Esmeralda broke into uncontrollable sobbing.

Clayton immediately began to look about for tracks, but he could find
nothing save a confusion of trampled grasses in the close vicinity, and
his woodcraft was too meager for the translation of what he did see.

All the balance of the day they sought through the jungle; but as night
drew on they were forced to give up in despair and hopelessness, for
they did not even know in what direction the thing had borne Jane.

It was long after dark ere they reached the cabin, and a sad and
grief-stricken party it was that sat silently within the little
structure.

Professor Porter finally broke the silence.  His tones were no longer
those of the erudite pedant theorizing upon the abstract and the
unknowable; but those of the man of action--determined, but tinged also
by a note of indescribable hopelessness and grief which wrung an
answering pang from Clayton's heart.

"I shall lie down now," said the old man, "and try to sleep.  Early
to-morrow, as soon as it is light, I shall take what food I can carry
and continue the search until I have found Jane.  I will not return
without her."

His companions did not reply at once.  Each was immersed in his own
sorrowful thoughts, and each knew, as did the old professor, what the
last words meant--Professor Porter would never return from the jungle.

At length Clayton arose and laid his hand gently upon Professor
Porter's bent old shoulder.

"I shall go with you, of course," he said.

"I knew that you would offer--that you would wish to go, Mr. Clayton;
but you must not.  Jane is beyond human assistance now.  What was once
my dear little girl shall not lie alone and friendless in the awful
jungle.

"The same vines and leaves will cover us, the same rains beat upon us;
and when the spirit of her mother is abroad, it will find us together
in death, as it has always found us in life.

"No; it is I alone who may go, for she was my daughter--all that was
left on earth for me to love."

"I shall go with you," said Clayton simply.

The old man looked up, regarding the strong, handsome face of William
Cecil Clayton intently.  Perhaps he read there the love that lay in the
heart beneath--the love for his daughter.

He had been too preoccupied with his own scholarly thoughts in the past
to consider the little occurrences, the chance words, which would have
indicated to a more practical man that these young people were being
drawn more and more closely to one another.  Now they came back to him,
one by one.

"As you wish," he said.

"You may count on me, also," said Mr. Philander.

"No, my dear old friend," said Professor Porter.  "We may not all go.
It would be cruelly wicked to leave poor Esmeralda here alone, and
three of us would be no more successful than one.

"There be enough dead things in the cruel forest as it is.  Come--let
us try to sleep a little."




Chapter XIX

The Call of the Primitive


From the time Tarzan left the tribe of great anthropoids in which he
had been raised, it was torn by continual strife and discord.  Terkoz
proved a cruel and capricious king, so that, one by one, many of the
older and weaker apes, upon whom he was particularly prone to vent his
brutish nature, took their families and sought the quiet and safety of
the far interior.

But at last those who remained were driven to desperation by the
continued truculence of Terkoz, and it so happened that one of them
recalled the parting admonition of Tarzan:

"If you have a chief who is cruel, do not do as the other apes do, and
attempt, any one of you, to pit yourself against him alone.  But,
instead, let two or three or four of you attack him together.  Then, if
you will do this, no chief will dare to be other than he should be, for
four of you can kill any chief who may ever be over you."

And the ape who recalled this wise counsel repeated it to several of
his fellows, so that when Terkoz returned to the tribe that day he
found a warm reception awaiting him.

There were no formalities.  As Terkoz reached the group, five huge,
hairy beasts sprang upon him.

At heart he was an arrant coward, which is the way with bullies among
apes as well as among men; so he did not remain to fight and die, but
tore himself away from them as quickly as he could and fled into the
sheltering boughs of the forest.

Two more attempts he made to rejoin the tribe, but on each occasion he
was set upon and driven away.  At last he gave it up, and turned,
foaming with rage and hatred, into the jungle.

For several days he wandered aimlessly, nursing his spite and looking
for some weak thing on which to vent his pent anger.

It was in this state of mind that the horrible, man-like beast,
swinging from tree to tree, came suddenly upon two women in the jungle.

He was right above them when he discovered them.  The first intimation
Jane Porter had of his presence was when the great hairy body dropped
to the earth beside her, and she saw the awful face and the snarling,
hideous mouth thrust within a foot of her.

One piercing scream escaped her lips as the brute hand clutched her
arm.  Then she was dragged toward those awful fangs which yawned at her
throat.  But ere they touched that fair skin another mood claimed the
anthropoid.

The tribe had kept his women.  He must find others to replace them.
This hairless white ape would be the first of his new household, and so
he threw her roughly across his broad, hairy shoulders and leaped back
into the trees, bearing Jane away.

Esmeralda's scream of terror had mingled once with that of Jane, and
then, as was Esmeralda's manner under stress of emergency which
required presence of mind, she swooned.

But Jane did not once lose consciousness.  It is true that that awful
face, pressing close to hers, and the stench of the foul breath beating
upon her nostrils, paralyzed her with terror; but her brain was clear,
and she comprehended all that transpired.

With what seemed to her marvelous rapidity the brute bore her through
the forest, but still she did not cry out or struggle.  The sudden
advent of the ape had confused her to such an extent that she thought
now that he was bearing her toward the beach.

For this reason she conserved her energies and her voice until she
could see that they had approached near enough to the camp to attract
the succor she craved.

She could not have known it, but she was being borne farther and
farther into the impenetrable jungle.

The scream that had brought Clayton and the two older men stumbling
through the undergrowth had led Tarzan of the Apes straight to where
Esmeralda lay, but it was not Esmeralda in whom his interest centered,
though pausing over her he saw that she was unhurt.

For a moment he scrutinized the ground below and the trees above, until
the ape that was in him by virtue of training and environment, combined
with the intelligence that was his by right of birth, told his wondrous
woodcraft the whole story as plainly as though he had seen the thing
happen with his own eyes.

And then he was gone again into the swaying trees, following the
high-flung spoor which no other human eye could have detected, much
less translated.

At boughs' ends, where the anthropoid swings from one tree to another,
there is most to mark the trail, but least to point the direction of
the quarry; for there the pressure is downward always, toward the small
end of the branch, whether the ape be leaving or entering a tree.
Nearer the center of the tree, where the signs of passage are fainter,
the direction is plainly marked.

Here, on this branch, a caterpillar has been crushed by the fugitive's
great foot, and Tarzan knows instinctively where that same foot would
touch in the next stride.  Here he looks to find a tiny particle of the
demolished larva, ofttimes not more than a speck of moisture.

Again, a minute bit of bark has been upturned by the scraping hand, and
the direction of the break indicates the direction of the passage.  Or
some great limb, or the stem of the tree itself has been brushed by the
hairy body, and a tiny shred of hair tells him by the direction from
which it is wedged beneath the bark that he is on the right trail.

Nor does he need to check his speed to catch these seemingly faint
records of the fleeing beast.

To Tarzan they stand out boldly against all the myriad other scars and
bruises and signs upon the leafy way.  But strongest of all is the
scent, for Tarzan is pursuing up the wind, and his trained nostrils are
as sensitive as a hound's.

There are those who believe that the lower orders are specially endowed
by nature with better olfactory nerves than man, but it is merely a
matter of development.

Man's survival does not hinge so greatly upon the perfection of his
senses.  His power to reason has relieved them of many of their duties,
and so they have, to some extent, atrophied, as have the muscles which
move the ears and scalp, merely from disuse.

The muscles are there, about the ears and beneath the scalp, and so are
the nerves which transmit sensations to the brain, but they are
under-developed because they are not needed.

Not so with Tarzan of the Apes.  From early infancy his survival had
depended upon acuteness of eyesight, hearing, smell, touch, and taste
far more than upon the more slowly developed organ of reason.

The least developed of all in Tarzan was the sense of taste, for he
could eat luscious fruits, or raw flesh, long buried with almost equal
appreciation; but in that he differed but slightly from more civilized
epicures.

Almost silently the ape-man sped on in the track of Terkoz and his
prey, but the sound of his approach reached the ears of the fleeing
beast and spurred it on to greater speed.

Three miles were covered before Tarzan overtook them, and then Terkoz,
seeing that further flight was futile, dropped to the ground in a small
open glade, that he might turn and fight for his prize or be free to
escape unhampered if he saw that the pursuer was more than a match for
him.

He still grasped Jane in one great arm as Tarzan bounded like a leopard
into the arena which nature had provided for this primeval-like battle.

When Terkoz saw that it was Tarzan who pursued him, he jumped to the
conclusion that this was Tarzan's woman, since they were of the same
kind--white and hairless--and so he rejoiced at this opportunity for
double revenge upon his hated enemy.

To Jane the strange apparition of this god-like man was as wine to sick
nerves.

From the description which Clayton and her father and Mr. Philander had
given her, she knew that it must be the same wonderful creature who had
saved them, and she saw in him only a protector and a friend.

But as Terkoz pushed her roughly aside to meet Tarzan's charge, and she
saw the great proportions of the ape and the mighty muscles and the
fierce fangs, her heart quailed.  How could any vanquish such a mighty
antagonist?

Like two charging bulls they came together, and like two wolves sought
each other's throat.  Against the long canines of the ape was pitted
the thin blade of the man's knife.

Jane--her lithe, young form flattened against the trunk of a great
tree, her hands tight pressed against her rising and falling bosom, and
her eyes wide with mingled horror, fascination, fear, and
admiration--watched the primordial ape battle with the primeval man for
possession of a woman--for her.

As the great muscles of the man's back and shoulders knotted beneath
the tension of his efforts, and the huge biceps and forearm held at bay
those mighty tusks, the veil of centuries of civilization and culture
was swept from the blurred vision of the Baltimore girl.

When the long knife drank deep a dozen times of Terkoz' heart's blood,
and the great carcass rolled lifeless upon the ground, it was a
primeval woman who sprang forward with outstretched arms toward the
primeval man who had fought for her and won her.

And Tarzan?

He did what no red-blooded man needs lessons in doing.  He took his
woman in his arms and smothered her upturned, panting lips with kisses.

For a moment Jane lay there with half-closed eyes.  For a moment--the
first in her young life--she knew the meaning of love.

But as suddenly as the veil had been withdrawn it dropped again, and an
outraged conscience suffused her face with its scarlet mantle, and a
mortified woman thrust Tarzan of the Apes from her and buried her face
in her hands.

Tarzan had been surprised when he had found the girl he had learned to
love after a vague and abstract manner a willing prisoner in his arms.
Now he was surprised that she repulsed him.

He came close to her once more and took hold of her arm.  She turned
upon him like a tigress, striking his great breast with her tiny hands.

Tarzan could not understand it.

A moment ago and it had been his intention to hasten Jane back to her
people, but that little moment was lost now in the dim and distant past
of things which were but can never be again, and with it the good
intentions had gone to join the impossible.

Since then Tarzan of the Apes had felt a warm, lithe form close pressed
to his.  Hot, sweet breath against his cheek and mouth had fanned a new
flame to life within his breast, and perfect lips had clung to his in
burning kisses that had seared a deep brand into his soul--a brand
which marked a new Tarzan.

Again he laid his hand upon her arm.  Again she repulsed him.  And then
Tarzan of the Apes did just what his first ancestor would have done.

He took his woman in his arms and carried her into the jungle.


Early the following morning the four within the little cabin by the
beach were awakened by the booming of a cannon.  Clayton was the first
to rush out, and there, beyond the harbor's mouth, he saw two vessels
lying at anchor.

One was the Arrow and the other a small French cruiser.  The sides of
the latter were crowded with men gazing shoreward, and it was evident
to Clayton, as to the others who had now joined him, that the gun which
they had heard had been fired to attract their attention if they still
remained at the cabin.

Both vessels lay at a considerable distance from shore, and it was
doubtful if their glasses would locate the waving hats of the little
party far in between the harbor's points.

Esmeralda had removed her red apron and was waving it frantically above
her head; but Clayton, still fearing that even this might not be seen,
hurried off toward the northern point where lay his signal pyre ready
for the match.

It seemed an age to him, as to those who waited breathlessly behind,
ere he reached the great pile of dry branches and underbrush.

As he broke from the dense wood and came in sight of the vessels again,
he was filled with consternation to see that the Arrow was making sail
and that the cruiser was already under way.

Quickly lighting the pyre in a dozen places, he hurried to the extreme
point of the promontory, where he stripped off his shirt, and, tying it
to a fallen branch, stood waving it back and forth above him.

But still the vessels continued to stand out; and he had given up all
hope, when the great column of smoke, rising above the forest in one
dense vertical shaft, attracted the attention of a lookout aboard the
cruiser, and instantly a dozen glasses were leveled on the beach.

Presently Clayton saw the two ships come about again; and while the
Arrow lay drifting quietly on the ocean, the cruiser steamed slowly
back toward shore.

At some distance away she stopped, and a boat was lowered and
dispatched toward the beach.

As it was drawn up a young officer stepped out.

"Monsieur Clayton, I presume?" he asked.

"Thank God, you have come!" was Clayton's reply.  "And it may be that
it is not too late even now."

"What do you mean, Monsieur?" asked the officer.

Clayton told of the abduction of Jane Porter and the need of armed men
to aid in the search for her.

"MON DIEU!" exclaimed the officer, sadly.  "Yesterday and it would not
have been too late.  Today and it may be better that the poor lady were
never found.  It is horrible, Monsieur.  It is too horrible."

Other boats had now put off from the cruiser, and Clayton, having
pointed out the harbor's entrance to the officer, entered the boat with
him and its nose was turned toward the little landlocked bay, into
which the other craft followed.

Soon the entire party had landed where stood Professor Porter, Mr.
Philander and the weeping Esmeralda.

Among the officers in the last boats to put off from the cruiser was
the commander of the vessel; and when he had heard the story of Jane's
abduction, he generously called for volunteers to accompany Professor
Porter and Clayton in their search.

Not an officer or a man was there of those brave and sympathetic
Frenchmen who did not quickly beg leave to be one of the expedition.

The commander selected twenty men and two officers, Lieutenant D'Arnot
and Lieutenant Charpentier.  A boat was dispatched to the cruiser for
provisions, ammunition, and carbines; the men were already armed with
revolvers.

Then, to Clayton's inquiries as to how they had happened to anchor off
shore and fire a signal gun, the commander, Captain Dufranne, explained
that a month before they had sighted the Arrow bearing southwest under
considerable canvas, and that when they had signaled her to come about
she had but crowded on more sail.

They had kept her hull-up until sunset, firing several shots after her,
but the next morning she was nowhere to be seen.  They had then
continued to cruise up and down the coast for several weeks, and had
about forgotten the incident of the recent chase, when, early one
morning a few days before the lookout had described a vessel laboring
in the trough of a heavy sea and evidently entirely out of control.

As they steamed nearer to the derelict they were surprised to note that
it was the same vessel that had run from them a few weeks earlier.  Her
forestaysail and mizzen spanker were set as though an effort had been
made to hold her head up into the wind, but the sheets had parted, and
the sails were tearing to ribbons in the half gale of wind.

In the high sea that was running it was a difficult and dangerous task
to attempt to put a prize crew aboard her; and as no signs of life had
been seen above deck, it was decided to stand by until the wind and sea
abated; but just then a figure was seen clinging to the rail and feebly
waving a mute signal of despair toward them.

Immediately a boat's crew was ordered out and an attempt was
successfully made to board the Arrow.

The sight that met the Frenchmen's eyes as they clambered over the
ship's side was appalling.

A dozen dead and dying men rolled hither and thither upon the pitching
deck, the living intermingled with the dead.  Two of the corpses
appeared to have been partially devoured as though by wolves.

The prize crew soon had the vessel under proper sail once more and the
living members of the ill-starred company carried below to their
hammocks.

The dead were wrapped in tarpaulins and lashed on deck to be identified
by their comrades before being consigned to the deep.

None of the living was conscious when the Frenchmen reached the Arrow's
deck.  Even the poor devil who had waved the single despairing signal
of distress had lapsed into unconsciousness before he had learned
whether it had availed or not.

It did not take the French officer long to learn what had caused the
terrible condition aboard; for when water and brandy were sought to
restore the men, it was found that there was none, nor even food of any
description.

He immediately signalled to the cruiser to send water, medicine, and
provisions, and another boat made the perilous trip to the Arrow.

When restoratives had been applied several of the men regained
consciousness, and then the whole story was told.  That part of it we
know up to the sailing of the Arrow after the murder of Snipes, and the
burial of his body above the treasure chest.

It seems that the pursuit by the cruiser had so terrorized the
mutineers that they had continued out across the Atlantic for several
days after losing her; but on discovering the meager supply of water
and provisions aboard, they had turned back toward the east.

With no one on board who understood navigation, discussions soon arose
as to their whereabouts; and as three days' sailing to the east did not
raise land, they bore off to the north, fearing that the high north
winds that had prevailed had driven them south of the southern
extremity of Africa.

They kept on a north-northeasterly course for two days, when they were
overtaken by a calm which lasted for nearly a week.  Their water was
gone, and in another day they would be without food.

Conditions changed rapidly from bad to worse.  One man went mad and
leaped overboard.  Soon another opened his veins and drank his own
blood.

When he died they threw him overboard also, though there were those
among them who wanted to keep the corpse on board.  Hunger was changing
them from human beasts to wild beasts.

Two days before they had been picked up by the cruiser they had become
too weak to handle the vessel, and that same day three men died.  On
the following morning it was seen that one of the corpses had been
partially devoured.

All that day the men lay glaring at each other like beasts of prey, and
the following morning two of the corpses lay almost entirely stripped
of flesh.

The men were but little stronger for their ghoulish repast, for the
want of water was by far the greatest agony with which they had to
contend.  And then the cruiser had come.

When those who could had recovered, the entire story had been told to
the French commander; but the men were too ignorant to be able to tell
him at just what point on the coast the professor and his party had
been marooned, so the cruiser had steamed slowly along within sight of
land, firing occasional signal guns and scanning every inch of the
beach with glasses.

They had anchored by night so as not to neglect a particle of the shore
line, and it had happened that the preceding night had brought them off
the very beach where lay the little camp they sought.

The signal guns of the afternoon before had not been heard by those on
shore, it was presumed, because they had doubtless been in the thick of
the jungle searching for Jane Porter, where the noise of their own
crashing through the underbrush would have drowned the report of a far
distant gun.

By the time the two parties had narrated their several adventures, the
cruiser's boat had returned with supplies and arms for the expedition.

Within a few minutes the little body of sailors and the two French
officers, together with Professor Porter and Clayton, set off upon
their hopeless and ill-fated quest into the untracked jungle.




Chapter XX

Heredity


When Jane realized that she was being borne away a captive by the
strange forest creature who had rescued her from the clutches of the
ape she struggled desperately to escape, but the strong arms that held
her as easily as though she had been but a day-old babe only pressed a
little more tightly.

So presently she gave up the futile effort and lay quietly, looking
through half-closed lids at the face of the man who strode easily
through the tangled undergrowth with her.

The face above her was one of extraordinary beauty.

A perfect type of the strongly masculine, unmarred by dissipation, or
brutal or degrading passions.  For, though Tarzan of the Apes was a
killer of men and of beasts, he killed as the hunter kills,
dispassionately, except on those rare occasions when he had killed for
hate--though not the brooding, malevolent hate which marks the features
of its own with hideous lines.

When Tarzan killed he more often smiled than scowled, and smiles are
the foundation of beauty.

One thing the girl had noticed particularly when she had seen Tarzan
rushing upon Terkoz--the vivid scarlet band upon his forehead, from
above the left eye to the scalp; but now as she scanned his features
she noticed that it was gone, and only a thin white line marked the
spot where it had been.

As she lay more quietly in his arms Tarzan slightly relaxed his grip
upon her.

Once he looked down into her eyes and smiled, and the girl had to close
her own to shut out the vision of that handsome, winning face.

Presently Tarzan took to the trees, and Jane, wondering that she felt
no fear, began to realize that in many respects she had never felt more
secure in her whole life than now as she lay in the arms of this
strong, wild creature, being borne, God alone knew where or to what
fate, deeper and deeper into the savage fastness of the untamed forest.

When, with closed eyes, she commenced to speculate upon the future, and
terrifying fears were conjured by a vivid imagination, she had but to
raise her lids and look upon that noble face so close to hers to
dissipate the last remnant of apprehension.

No, he could never harm her; of that she was convinced when she
translated the fine features and the frank, brave eyes above her into
the chivalry which they proclaimed.

On and on they went through what seemed to Jane a solid mass of
verdure, yet ever there appeared to open before this forest god a
passage, as by magic, which closed behind them as they passed.

Scarce a branch scraped against her, yet above and below, before and
behind, the view presented naught but a solid mass of inextricably
interwoven branches and creepers.

As Tarzan moved steadily onward his mind was occupied with many strange
and new thoughts.  Here was a problem the like of which he had never
encountered, and he felt rather than reasoned that he must meet it as a
man and not as an ape.

The free movement through the middle terrace, which was the route he
had followed for the most part, had helped to cool the ardor of the
first fierce passion of his new found love.

Now he discovered himself speculating upon the fate which would have
fallen to the girl had he not rescued her from Terkoz.

He knew why the ape had not killed her, and he commenced to compare his
intentions with those of Terkoz.

True, it was the order of the jungle for the male to take his mate by
force; but could Tarzan be guided by the laws of the beasts?  Was not
Tarzan a Man?  But what did men do?  He was puzzled; for he did not
know.

He wished that he might ask the girl, and then it came to him that she
had already answered him in the futile struggle she had made to escape
and to repulse him.

But now they had come to their destination, and Tarzan of the Apes with
Jane in his strong arms, swung lightly to the turf of the arena where
the great apes held their councils and danced the wild orgy of the
Dum-Dum.

Though they had come many miles, it was still but midafternoon, and the
amphitheater was bathed in the half light which filtered through the
maze of encircling foliage.

The green turf looked soft and cool and inviting.  The myriad noises of
the jungle seemed far distant and hushed to a mere echo of blurred
sounds, rising and falling like the surf upon a remote shore.

A feeling of dreamy peacefulness stole over Jane as she sank down upon
the grass where Tarzan had placed her, and as she looked up at his
great figure towering above her, there was added a strange sense of
perfect security.

As she watched him from beneath half-closed lids, Tarzan crossed the
little circular clearing toward the trees upon the further side.  She
noted the graceful majesty of his carriage, the perfect symmetry of his
magnificent figure and the poise of his well-shaped head upon his broad
shoulders.

What a perfect creature!  There could be naught of cruelty or baseness
beneath that godlike exterior.  Never, she thought had such a man
strode the earth since God created the first in his own image.

With a bound Tarzan sprang into the trees and disappeared.  Jane
wondered where he had gone.  Had he left her there to her fate in the
lonely jungle?

She glanced nervously about.  Every vine and bush seemed but the
lurking-place of some huge and horrible beast waiting to bury gleaming
fangs into her soft flesh.  Every sound she magnified into the stealthy
creeping of a sinuous and malignant body.

How different now that he had left her!

For a few minutes that seemed hours to the frightened girl, she sat
with tense nerves waiting for the spring of the crouching thing that
was to end her misery of apprehension.

She almost prayed for the cruel teeth that would give her
unconsciousness and surcease from the agony of fear.

She heard a sudden, slight sound behind her.  With a cry she sprang to
her feet and turned to face her end.

There stood Tarzan, his arms filled with ripe and luscious fruit.

Jane reeled and would have fallen, had not Tarzan, dropping his burden,
caught her in his arms.  She did not lose consciousness, but she clung
tightly to him, shuddering and trembling like a frightened deer.

Tarzan of the Apes stroked her soft hair and tried to comfort and quiet
her as Kala had him, when, as a little ape, he had been frightened by
Sabor, the lioness, or Histah, the snake.

Once he pressed his lips lightly upon her forehead, and she did not
move, but closed her eyes and sighed.

She could not analyze her feelings, nor did she wish to attempt it.
She was satisfied to feel the safety of those strong arms, and to leave
her future to fate; for the last few hours had taught her to trust this
strange wild creature of the forest as she would have trusted but few
of the men of her acquaintance.

As she thought of the strangeness of it, there commenced to dawn upon
her the realization that she had, possibly, learned something else
which she had never really known before--love.  She wondered and then
she smiled.

And still smiling, she pushed Tarzan gently away; and looking at him
with a half-smiling, half-quizzical expression that made her face
wholly entrancing, she pointed to the fruit upon the ground, and seated
herself upon the edge of the earthen drum of the anthropoids, for
hunger was asserting itself.

Tarzan quickly gathered up the fruit, and, bringing it, laid it at her
feet; and then he, too, sat upon the drum beside her, and with his
knife opened and prepared the various fruits for her meal.

Together and in silence they ate, occasionally stealing sly glances at
one another, until finally Jane broke into a merry laugh in which
Tarzan joined.

"I wish you spoke English," said the girl.

Tarzan shook his head, and an expression of wistful and pathetic
longing sobered his laughing eyes.

Then Jane tried speaking to him in French, and then in German; but she
had to laugh at her own blundering attempt at the latter tongue.

"Anyway," she said to him in English, "you understand my German as well
as they did in Berlin."

Tarzan had long since reached a decision as to what his future
procedure should be.  He had had time to recollect all that he had read
of the ways of men and women in the books at the cabin.  He would act
as he imagined the men in the books would have acted were they in his
place.

Again he rose and went into the trees, but first he tried to explain by
means of signs that he would return shortly, and he did so well that
Jane understood and was not afraid when he had gone.

Only a feeling of loneliness came over her and she watched the point
where he had disappeared, with longing eyes, awaiting his return.  As
before, she was appraised of his presence by a soft sound behind her,
and turned to see him coming across the turf with a great armful of
branches.

Then he went back again into the jungle and in a few minutes reappeared
with a quantity of soft grasses and ferns.

Two more trips he made until he had quite a pile of material at hand.

Then he spread the ferns and grasses upon the ground in a soft flat
bed, and above it leaned many branches together so that they met a few
feet over its center.  Upon these he spread layers of huge leaves of
the great elephant's ear, and with more branches and more leaves he
closed one end of the little shelter he had built.

Then they sat down together again upon the edge of the drum and tried
to talk by signs.

The magnificent diamond locket which hung about Tarzan's neck, had been
a source of much wonderment to Jane.  She pointed to it now, and Tarzan
removed it and handed the pretty bauble to her.

She saw that it was the work of a skilled artisan and that the diamonds
were of great brilliancy and superbly set, but the cutting of them
denoted that they were of a former day.  She noticed too that the
locket opened, and, pressing the hidden clasp, she saw the two halves
spring apart to reveal in either section an ivory miniature.

One was of a beautiful woman and the other might have been a likeness
of the man who sat beside her, except for a subtle difference of
expression that was scarcely definable.

She looked up at Tarzan to find him leaning toward her gazing on the
miniatures with an expression of astonishment.  He reached out his hand
for the locket and took it away from her, examining the likenesses
within with unmistakable signs of surprise and new interest.  His
manner clearly denoted that he had never before seen them, nor imagined
that the locket opened.

This fact caused Jane to indulge in further speculation, and it taxed
her imagination to picture how this beautiful ornament came into the
possession of a wild and savage creature of the unexplored jungles of
Africa.

Still more wonderful was how it contained the likeness of one who might
be a brother, or, more likely, the father of this woodland demi-god who
was even ignorant of the fact that the locket opened.

Tarzan was still gazing with fixity at the two faces.  Presently he
removed the quiver from his shoulder, and emptying the arrows upon the
ground reached into the bottom of the bag-like receptacle and drew
forth a flat object wrapped in many soft leaves and tied with bits of
long grass.

Carefully he unwrapped it, removing layer after layer of leaves until
at length he held a photograph in his hand.

Pointing to the miniature of the man within the locket he handed the
photograph to Jane, holding the open locket beside it.

The photograph only served to puzzle the girl still more, for it was
evidently another likeness of the same man whose picture rested in the
locket beside that of the beautiful young woman.

Tarzan was looking at her with an expression of puzzled bewilderment in
his eyes as she glanced up at him.  He seemed to be framing a question
with his lips.

The girl pointed to the photograph and then to the miniature and then
to him, as though to indicate that she thought the likenesses were of
him, but he only shook his head, and then shrugging his great
shoulders, he took the photograph from her and having carefully
rewrapped it, placed it again in the bottom of his quiver.

For a few moments he sat in silence, his eyes bent upon the ground,
while Jane held the little locket in her hand, turning it over and over
in an endeavor to find some further clue that might lead to the
identity of its original owner.

At length a simple explanation occurred to her.

The locket had belonged to Lord Greystoke, and the likenesses were of
himself and Lady Alice.

This wild creature had simply found it in the cabin by the beach.  How
stupid of her not to have thought of that solution before.

But to account for the strange likeness between Lord Greystoke and this
forest god--that was quite beyond her, and it is not strange that she
could not imagine that this naked savage was indeed an English nobleman.

At length Tarzan looked up to watch the girl as she examined the
locket.  He could not fathom the meaning of the faces within, but he
could read the interest and fascination upon the face of the live young
creature by his side.

She noticed that he was watching her and thinking that he wished his
ornament again she held it out to him.  He took it from her and taking
the chain in his two hands he placed it about her neck, smiling at her
expression of surprise at his unexpected gift.

Jane shook her head vehemently and would have removed the golden links
from about her throat, but Tarzan would not let her.  Taking her hands
in his, when she insisted upon it, he held them tightly to prevent her.

At last she desisted and with a little laugh raised the locket to her
lips.

Tarzan did not know precisely what she meant, but he guessed correctly
that it was her way of acknowledging the gift, and so he rose, and
taking the locket in his hand, stooped gravely like some courtier of
old, and pressed his lips upon it where hers had rested.

It was a stately and gallant little compliment performed with the grace
and dignity of utter unconsciousness of self.  It was the hall-mark of
his aristocratic birth, the natural outcropping of many generations of
fine breeding, an hereditary instinct of graciousness which a lifetime
of uncouth and savage training and environment could not eradicate.

It was growing dark now, and so they ate again of the fruit which was
both food and drink for them; then Tarzan rose, and leading Jane to the
little bower he had erected, motioned her to go within.

For the first time in hours a feeling of fear swept over her, and
Tarzan felt her draw away as though shrinking from him.

Contact with this girl for half a day had left a very diferent Tarzan
from the one on whom the morning's sun had risen.

Now, in every fiber of his being, heredity spoke louder than training.

He had not in one swift transition become a polished gentleman from a
savage ape-man, but at last the instincts of the former predominated,
and over all was the desire to please the woman he loved, and to appear
well in her eyes.

So Tarzan of the Apes did the only thing he knew to assure Jane of her
safety.  He removed his hunting knife from its sheath and handed it to
her hilt first, again motioning her into the bower.

The girl understood, and taking the long knife she entered and lay down
upon the soft grasses while Tarzan of the Apes stretched himself upon
the ground across the entrance.

And thus the rising sun found them in the morning.

When Jane awoke, she did not at first recall the strange events of the
preceding day, and so she wondered at her odd surroundings--the little
leafy bower, the soft grasses of her bed, the unfamiliar prospect from
the opening at her feet.

Slowly the circumstances of her position crept one by one into her
mind.  And then a great wonderment arose in her heart--a mighty wave of
thankfulness and gratitude that though she had been in such terrible
danger, yet she was unharmed.

She moved to the entrance of the shelter to look for Tarzan.  He was
gone; but this time no fear assailed her for she knew that he would
return.

In the grass at the entrance to her bower she saw the imprint of his
body where he had lain all night to guard her.  She knew that the fact
that he had been there was all that had permitted her to sleep in such
peaceful security.

With him near, who could entertain fear?  She wondered if there was
another man on earth with whom a girl could feel so safe in the heart
of this savage African jungle.  Even the lions and panthers had no
fears for her now.

She looked up to see his lithe form drop softly from a near-by tree.
As he caught her eyes upon him his face lighted with that frank and
radiant smile that had won her confidence the day before.

As he approached her Jane's heart beat faster and her eyes brightened
as they had never done before at the approach of any man.

He had again been gathering fruit and this he laid at the entrance of
her bower.  Once more they sat down together to eat.

Jane commenced to wonder what his plans were.  Would he take her back
to the beach or would he keep her here?  Suddenly she realized that the
matter did not seem to give her much concern.  Could it be that she did
not care!

She began to comprehend, also, that she was entirely contented sitting
here by the side of this smiling giant eating delicious fruit in a
sylvan paradise far within the remote depths of an African jungle--that
she was contented and very happy.

She could not understand it.  Her reason told her that she should be
torn by wild anxieties, weighted by dread fears, cast down by gloomy
forebodings; but instead, her heart was singing and she was smiling
into the answering face of the man beside her.

When they had finished their breakfast Tarzan went to her bower and
recovered his knife.  The girl had entirely forgotten it.  She realized
that it was because she had forgotten the fear that prompted her to
accept it.

Motioning her to follow, Tarzan walked toward the trees at the edge of
the arena, and taking her in one strong arm swung to the branches above.

The girl knew that he was taking her back to her people, and she could
not understand the sudden feeling of loneliness and sorrow which crept
over her.

For hours they swung slowly along.

Tarzan of the Apes did not hurry.  He tried to draw out the sweet
pleasure of that journey with those dear arms about his neck as long as
possible, and so he went far south of the direct route to the beach.

Several times they halted for brief rests, which Tarzan did not need,
and at noon they stopped for an hour at a little brook, where they
quenched their thirst, and ate.

So it was nearly sunset when they came to the clearing, and Tarzan,
dropping to the ground beside a great tree, parted the tall jungle
grass and pointed out the little cabin to her.

She took him by the hand to lead him to it, that she might tell her
father that this man had saved her from death and worse than death,
that he had watched over her as carefully as a mother might have done.

But again the timidity of the wild thing in the face of human
habitation swept over Tarzan of the Apes.  He drew back, shaking his
head.

The girl came close to him, looking up with pleading eyes.  Somehow she
could not bear the thought of his going back into the terrible jungle
alone.

Still he shook his head, and finally he drew her to him very gently and
stooped to kiss her, but first he looked into her eyes and waited to
learn if she were pleased, or if she would repulse him.

Just an instant the girl hesitated, and then she realized the truth,
and throwing her arms about his neck she drew his face to hers and
kissed him--unashamed.

"I love you--I love you," she murmured.

From far in the distance came the faint sound of many guns.  Tarzan and
Jane raised their heads.

From the cabin came Mr. Philander and Esmeralda.

From where Tarzan and the girl stood they could not see the two vessels
lying at anchor in the harbor.

Tarzan pointed toward the sounds, touched his breast and pointed again.
She understood.  He was going, and something told her that it was
because he thought her people were in danger.

Again he kissed her.

"Come back to me," she whispered.  "I shall wait for you--always."

He was gone--and Jane turned to walk across the clearing to the cabin.

Mr. Philander was the first to see her.  It was dusk and Mr. Philander
was very near sighted.

"Quickly, Esmeralda!" he cried.  "Let us seek safety within; it is a
lioness.  Bless me!"

Esmeralda did not bother to verify Mr. Philander's vision.  His tone
was enough.  She was within the cabin and had slammed and bolted the
door before he had finished pronouncing her name.  The "Bless me" was
startled out of Mr. Philander by the discovery that Esmeralda, in the
exuberance of her haste, had fastened him upon the same side of the
door as was the close-approaching lioness.

He beat furiously upon the heavy portal.

"Esmeralda!  Esmeralda!" he shrieked.  "Let me in.  I am being devoured
by a lion."

Esmeralda thought that the noise upon the door was made by the lioness
in her attempts to pursue her, so, after her custom, she fainted.

Mr. Philander cast a frightened glance behind him.

Horrors!  The thing was quite close now.  He tried to scramble up the
side of the cabin, and succeeded in catching a fleeting hold upon the
thatched roof.

For a moment he hung there, clawing with his feet like a cat on a
clothesline, but presently a piece of the thatch came away, and Mr.
Philander, preceding it, was precipitated upon his back.

At the instant he fell a remarkable item of natural history leaped to
his mind.  If one feigns death lions and lionesses are supposed to
ignore one, according to Mr. Philander's faulty memory.

So Mr. Philander lay as he had fallen, frozen into the horrid semblance
of death.  As his arms and legs had been extended stiffly upward as he
came to earth upon his back the attitude of death was anything but
impressive.

Jane had been watching his antics in mild-eyed surprise.  Now she
laughed--a little choking gurgle of a laugh; but it was enough.  Mr.
Philander rolled over upon his side and peered about.  At length he
discovered her.

"Jane!" he cried.  "Jane Porter.  Bless me!"

He scrambled to his feet and rushed toward her.  He could not believe
that it was she, and alive.

"Bless me!"  Where did you come from?  Where in the world have you
been?  How--"

"Mercy, Mr. Philander," interrupted the girl, "I can never remember so
many questions."

"Well, well," said Mr. Philander.  "Bless me!  I am so filled with
surprise and exuberant delight at seeing you safe and well again that I
scarcely know what I am saying, really.  But come, tell me all that has
happened to you."




Chapter XXI

The Village of Torture


As the little expedition of sailors toiled through the dense jungle
searching for signs of Jane Porter, the futility of their venture
became more and more apparent, but the grief of the old man and the
hopeless eyes of the young Englishman prevented the kind hearted
D'Arnot from turning back.

He thought that there might be a bare possibility of finding her body,
or the remains of it, for he was positive that she had been devoured by
some beast of prey.  He deployed his men into a skirmish line from the
point where Esmeralda had been found, and in this extended formation
they pushed their way, sweating and panting, through the tangled vines
and creepers.  It was slow work.  Noon found them but a few miles
inland.  They halted for a brief rest then, and after pushing on for a
short distance further one of the men discovered a well-marked trail.

It was an old elephant track, and D'Arnot after consulting with
Professor Porter and Clayton decided to follow it.

The path wound through the jungle in a northeasterly direction, and
along it the column moved in single file.

Lieutenant D'Arnot was in the lead and moving at a quick pace, for the
trail was comparatively open.  Immediately behind him came Professor
Porter, but as he could not keep pace with the younger man D'Arnot was
a hundred yards in advance when suddenly a half dozen black warriors
arose about him.

D'Arnot gave a warning shout to his column as the blacks closed on him,
but before he could draw his revolver he had been pinioned and dragged
into the jungle.

His cry had alarmed the sailors and a dozen of them sprang forward past
Professor Porter, running up the trail to their officer's aid.

They did not know the cause of his outcry, only that it was a warning
of danger ahead.  They had rushed past the spot where D'Arnot had been
seized when a spear hurled from the jungle transfixed one of the men,
and then a volley of arrows fell among them.

Raising their rifles they fired into the underbrush in the direction
from which the missiles had come.

By this time the balance of the party had come up, and volley after
volley was fired toward the concealed foe.  It was these shots that
Tarzan and Jane Porter had heard.

Lieutenant Charpentier, who had been bringing up the rear of the
column, now came running to the scene, and on hearing the details of
the ambush ordered the men to follow him, and plunged into the tangled
vegetation.

In an instant they were in a hand-to-hand fight with some fifty black
warriors of Mbonga's village.  Arrows and bullets flew thick and fast.

Queer African knives and French gun butts mingled for a moment in
savage and bloody duels, but soon the natives fled into the jungle,
leaving the Frenchmen to count their losses.

Four of the twenty were dead, a dozen others were wounded, and
Lieutenant D'Arnot was missing.  Night was falling rapidly, and their
predicament was rendered doubly worse when they could not even find the
elephant trail which they had been following.

There was but one thing to do, make camp where they were until
daylight.  Lieutenant Charpentier ordered a clearing made and a
circular abatis of underbrush constructed about the camp.

This work was not completed until long after dark, the men building a
huge fire in the center of the clearing to give them light to work by.

When all was safe as possible against attack of wild beasts and savage
men, Lieutenant Charpentier placed sentries about the little camp and
the tired and hungry men threw themselves upon the ground to sleep.

The groans of the wounded, mingled with the roaring and growling of the
great beasts which the noise and firelight had attracted, kept sleep,
except in its most fitful form, from the tired eyes.  It was a sad and
hungry party that lay through the long night praying for dawn.

The blacks who had seized D'Arnot had not waited to participate in the
fight which followed, but instead had dragged their prisoner a little
way through the jungle and then struck the trail further on beyond the
scene of the fighting in which their fellows were engaged.

They hurried him along, the sounds of battle growing fainter and
fainter as they drew away from the contestants until there suddenly
broke upon D'Arnot's vision a good-sized clearing at one end of which
stood a thatched and palisaded village.

It was now dusk, but the watchers at the gate saw the approaching trio
and distinguished one as a prisoner ere they reached the portals.

A cry went up within the palisade.  A great throng of women and
children rushed out to meet the party.

And then began for the French officer the most terrifying experience
which man can encounter upon earth--the reception of a white prisoner
into a village of African cannibals.

To add to the fiendishness of their cruel savagery was the poignant
memory of still crueler barbarities practiced upon them and theirs by
the white officers of that arch hypocrite, Leopold II of Belgium,
because of whose atrocities they had fled the Congo Free State--a
pitiful remnant of what once had been a mighty tribe.

They fell upon D'Arnot tooth and nail, beating him with sticks and
stones and tearing at him with claw-like hands.  Every vestige of
clothing was torn from him, and the merciless blows fell upon his bare
and quivering flesh.  But not once did the Frenchman cry out in pain.
He breathed a silent prayer that he be quickly delivered from his
torture.

But the death he prayed for was not to be so easily had.  Soon the
warriors beat the women away from their prisoner.  He was to be saved
for nobler sport than this, and the first wave of their passion having
subsided they contented themselves with crying out taunts and insults
and spitting upon him.

Presently they reached the center of the village.  There D'Arnot was
bound securely to the great post from which no live man had ever been
released.

A number of the women scattered to their several huts to fetch pots and
water, while others built a row of fires on which portions of the feast
were to be boiled while the balance would be slowly dried in strips for
future use, as they expected the other warriors to return with many
prisoners.  The festivities were delayed awaiting the return of the
warriors who had remained to engage in the skirmish with the white men,
so that it was quite late when all were in the village, and the dance
of death commenced to circle around the doomed officer.

Half fainting from pain and exhaustion, D'Arnot watched from beneath
half-closed lids what seemed but the vagary of delirium, or some horrid
nightmare from which he must soon awake.

The bestial faces, daubed with color--the huge mouths and flabby
hanging lips--the yellow teeth, sharp filed--the rolling, demon
eyes--the shining naked bodies--the cruel spears.  Surely no such
creatures really existed upon earth--he must indeed be dreaming.

The savage, whirling bodies circled nearer.  Now a spear sprang forth
and touched his arm.  The sharp pain and the feel of hot, trickling
blood assured him of the awful reality of his hopeless position.

Another spear and then another touched him.  He closed his eyes and
held his teeth firm set--he would not cry out.

He was a soldier of France, and he would teach these beasts how an
officer and a gentleman died.


Tarzan of the Apes needed no interpreter to translate the story of
those distant shots.  With Jane Porter's kisses still warm upon his
lips he was swinging with incredible rapidity through the forest trees
straight toward the village of Mbonga.

He was not interested in the location of the encounter, for he judged
that that would soon be over.  Those who were killed he could not aid,
those who escaped would not need his assistance.

It was to those who had neither been killed or escaped that he
hastened.  And he knew that he would find them by the great post in the
center of Mbonga village.

Many times had Tarzan seen Mbonga's black raiding parties return from
the northward with prisoners, and always were the same scenes enacted
about that grim stake, beneath the flaring light of many fires.

He knew, too, that they seldom lost much time before consummating the
fiendish purpose of their captures.  He doubted that he would arrive in
time to do more than avenge.

On he sped.  Night had fallen and he traveled high along the upper
terrace where the gorgeous tropic moon lighted the dizzy pathway
through the gently undulating branches of the tree tops.

Presently he caught the reflection of a distant blaze.  It lay to the
right of his path.  It must be the light from the camp fire the two men
had built before they were attacked--Tarzan knew nothing of the
presence of the sailors.

So sure was Tarzan of his jungle knowledge that he did not turn from
his course, but passed the glare at a distance of a half mile.  It was
the camp fire of the Frenchmen.

In a few minutes more Tarzan swung into the trees above Mbonga's
village.  Ah, he was not quite too late!  Or, was he?  He could not
tell.  The figure at the stake was very still, yet the black warriors
were but pricking it.

Tarzan knew their customs.  The death blow had not been struck.  He
could tell almost to a minute how far the dance had gone.

In another instant Mbonga's knife would sever one of the victim's
ears--that would mark the beginning of the end, for very shortly after
only a writhing mass of mutilated flesh would remain.

There would still be life in it, but death then would be the only
charity it craved.

The stake stood forty feet from the nearest tree.  Tarzan coiled his
rope.  Then there rose suddenly above the fiendish cries of the dancing
demons the awful challenge of the ape-man.

The dancers halted as though turned to stone.

The rope sped with singing whir high above the heads of the blacks.  It
was quite invisible in the flaring lights of the camp fires.

D'Arnot opened his eyes.  A huge black, standing directly before him,
lunged backward as though felled by an invisible hand.

Struggling and shrieking, his body, rolling from side to side, moved
quickly toward the shadows beneath the trees.

The blacks, their eyes protruding in horror, watched spellbound.

Once beneath the trees, the body rose straight into the air, and as it
disappeared into the foliage above, the terrified negroes, screaming
with fright, broke into a mad race for the village gate.

D'Arnot was left alone.

He was a brave man, but he had felt the short hairs bristle upon the
nape of his neck when that uncanny cry rose upon the air.

As the writhing body of the black soared, as though by unearthly power,
into the dense foliage of the forest, D'Arnot felt an icy shiver run
along his spine, as though death had risen from a dark grave and laid a
cold and clammy finger on his flesh.

As D'Arnot watched the spot where the body had entered the tree he
heard the sounds of movement there.

The branches swayed as though under the weight of a man's body--there
was a crash and the black came sprawling to earth again,--to lie very
quietly where he had fallen.

Immediately after him came a white body, but this one alighted erect.

D'Arnot saw a clean-limbed young giant emerge from the shadows into the
firelight and come quickly toward him.

What could it mean?  Who could it be?  Some new creature of torture and
destruction, doubtless.

D'Arnot waited.  His eyes never left the face of the advancing man.
Nor did the other's frank, clear eyes waver beneath D'Arnot's fixed
gaze.

D'Arnot was reassured, but still without much hope, though he felt that
that face could not mask a cruel heart.

Without a word Tarzan of the Apes cut the bonds which held the
Frenchman.  Weak from suffering and loss of blood, he would have fallen
but for the strong arm that caught him.

He felt himself lifted from the ground.  There was a sensation as of
flying, and then he lost consciousness.




Chapter XXII

The Search Party


When dawn broke upon the little camp of Frenchmen in the heart of the
jungle it found a sad and disheartened group.

As soon as it was light enough to see their surroundings Lieutenant
Charpentier sent men in groups of three in several directions to locate
the trail, and in ten minutes it was found and the expedition was
hurrying back toward the beach.

It was slow work, for they bore the bodies of six dead men, two more
having succumbed during the night, and several of those who were
wounded required support to move even very slowly.

Charpentier had decided to return to camp for reinforcements, and then
make an attempt to track down the natives and rescue D'Arnot.

It was late in the afternoon when the exhausted men reached the
clearing by the beach, but for two of them the return brought so great
a happiness that all their suffering and heartbreaking grief was
forgotten on the instant.

As the little party emerged from the jungle the first person that
Professor Porter and Cecil Clayton saw was Jane, standing by the cabin
door.

With a little cry of joy and relief she ran forward to greet them,
throwing her arms about her father's neck and bursting into tears for
the first time since they had been cast upon this hideous and
adventurous shore.

Professor Porter strove manfully to suppress his own emotions, but the
strain upon his nerves and weakened vitality were too much for him, and
at length, burying his old face in the girl's shoulder, he sobbed
quietly like a tired child.

Jane led him toward the cabin, and the Frenchmen turned toward the
beach from which several of their fellows were advancing to meet them.

Clayton, wishing to leave father and daughter alone, joined the sailors
and remained talking with the officers until their boat pulled away
toward the cruiser whither Lieutenant Charpentier was bound to report
the unhappy outcome of his adventure.

Then Clayton turned back slowly toward the cabin.  His heart was filled
with happiness.  The woman he loved was safe.

He wondered by what manner of miracle she had been spared.  To see her
alive seemed almost unbelievable.

As he approached the cabin he saw Jane coming out.  When she saw him
she hurried forward to meet him.

"Jane!" he cried, "God has been good to us, indeed.  Tell me how you
escaped--what form Providence took to save you for--us."

He had never before called her by her given name.  Forty-eight hours
before it would have suffused Jane with a soft glow of pleasure to have
heard that name from Clayton's lips--now it frightened her.

"Mr. Clayton," she said quietly, extending her hand, "first let me
thank you for your chivalrous loyalty to my dear father.  He has told
me how noble and self-sacrificing you have been.  How can we repay you!"

Clayton noticed that she did not return his familiar salutation, but he
felt no misgivings on that score.  She had been through so much.  This
was no time to force his love upon her, he quickly realized.

"I am already repaid," he said.  "Just to see you and Professor Porter
both safe, well, and together again.  I do not think that I could much
longer have endured the pathos of his quiet and uncomplaining grief.

"It was the saddest experience of my life, Miss Porter; and then, added
to it, there was my own grief--the greatest I have ever known.  But his
was so hopeless--his was pitiful.  It taught me that no love, not even
that of a man for his wife may be so deep and terrible and
self-sacrificing as the love of a father for his daughter."

The girl bowed her head.  There was a question she wanted to ask, but
it seemed almost sacrilegious in the face of the love of these two men
and the terrible suffering they had endured while she sat laughing and
happy beside a godlike creature of the forest, eating delicious fruits
and looking with eyes of love into answering eyes.

But love is a strange master, and human nature is still stranger, so
she asked her question.

"Where is the forest man who went to rescue you?  Why did he not
return?"

"I do not understand," said Clayton.  "Whom do you mean?"

"He who has saved each of us--who saved me from the gorilla."

"Oh," cried Clayton, in surprise.  "It was he who rescued you?  You
have not told me anything of your adventure, you know."

"But the wood man," she urged.  "Have you not seen him?  When we heard
the shots in the jungle, very faint and far away, he left me.  We had
just reached the clearing, and he hurried off in the direction of the
fighting.  I know he went to aid you."

Her tone was almost pleading--her manner tense with suppressed emotion.
Clayton could not but notice it, and he wondered, vaguely, why she was
so deeply moved--so anxious to know the whereabouts of this strange
creature.

Yet a feeling of apprehension of some impending sorrow haunted him, and
in his breast, unknown to himself, was implanted the first germ of
jealousy and suspicion of the ape-man, to whom he owed his life.

"We did not see him," he replied quietly.  "He did not join us."  And
then after a moment of thoughtful pause:  "Possibly he joined his own
tribe--the men who attacked us."  He did not know why he had said it,
for he did not believe it.

The girl looked at him wide eyed for a moment.

"No!" she exclaimed vehemently, much too vehemently he thought.  "It
could not be.  They were savages."

Clayton looked puzzled.

"He is a strange, half-savage creature of the jungle, Miss Porter.  We
know nothing of him.  He neither speaks nor understands any European
tongue--and his ornaments and weapons are those of the West Coast
savages."

Clayton was speaking rapidly.

"There are no other human beings than savages within hundreds of miles,
Miss Porter.  He must belong to the tribes which attacked us, or to
some other equally savage--he may even be a cannibal."

Jane blanched.

"I will not believe it," she half whispered.  "It is not true.  You
shall see," she said, addressing Clayton, "that he will come back and
that he will prove that you are wrong.  You do not know him as I do.  I
tell you that he is a gentleman."

Clayton was a generous and chivalrous man, but something in the girl's
breathless defense of the forest man stirred him to unreasoning
jealousy, so that for the instant he forgot all that they owed to this
wild demi-god, and he answered her with a half sneer upon his lip.

"Possibly you are right, Miss Porter," he said, "but I do not think
that any of us need worry about our carrion-eating acquaintance.  The
chances are that he is some half-demented castaway who will forget us
more quickly, but no more surely, than we shall forget him.  He is only
a beast of the jungle, Miss Porter."

The girl did not answer, but she felt her heart shrivel within her.

She knew that Clayton spoke merely what he thought, and for the first
time she began to analyze the structure which supported her newfound
love, and to subject its object to a critical examination.

Slowly she turned and walked back to the cabin.  She tried to imagine
her wood-god by her side in the saloon of an ocean liner.  She saw him
eating with his hands, tearing his food like a beast of prey, and
wiping his greasy fingers upon his thighs.  She shuddered.

She saw him as she introduced him to her friends--uncouth,
illiterate--a boor; and the girl winced.

She had reached her room now, and as she sat upon the edge of her bed
of ferns and grasses, with one hand resting upon her rising and falling
bosom, she felt the hard outlines of the man's locket.

She drew it out, holding it in the palm of her hand for a moment with
tear-blurred eyes bent upon it.  Then she raised it to her lips, and
crushing it there buried her face in the soft ferns, sobbing.

"Beast?" she murmured.  "Then God make me a beast; for, man or beast, I
am yours."

She did not see Clayton again that day.  Esmeralda brought her supper
to her, and she sent word to her father that she was suffering from the
reaction following her adventure.

The next morning Clayton left early with the relief expedition in
search of Lieutenant D'Arnot.  There were two hundred armed men this
time, with ten officers and two surgeons, and provisions for a week.

They carried bedding and hammocks, the latter for transporting their
sick and wounded.

It was a determined and angry company--a punitive expedition as well as
one of relief.  They reached the site of the skirmish of the previous
expedition shortly after noon, for they were now traveling a known
trail and no time was lost in exploring.

From there on the elephant-track led straight to Mbonga's village.  It
was but two o'clock when the head of the column halted upon the edge of
the clearing.

Lieutenant Charpentier, who was in command, immediately sent a portion
of his force through the jungle to the opposite side of the village.
Another detachment was dispatched to a point before the village gate,
while he remained with the balance upon the south side of the clearing.

It was arranged that the party which was to take its position to the
north, and which would be the last to gain its station should commence
the assault, and that their opening volley should be the signal for a
concerted rush from all sides in an attempt to carry the village by
storm at the first charge.

For half an hour the men with Lieutenant Charpentier crouched in the
dense foliage of the jungle, waiting the signal.  To them it seemed
like hours.  They could see natives in the fields, and others moving in
and out of the village gate.

At length the signal came--a sharp rattle of musketry, and like one
man, an answering volley tore from the jungle to the west and to the
south.

The natives in the field dropped their implements and broke madly for
the palisade.  The French bullets mowed them down, and the French
sailors bounded over their prostrate bodies straight for the village
gate.

So sudden and unexpected the assault had been that the whites reached
the gates before the frightened natives could bar them, and in another
minute the village street was filled with armed men fighting hand to
hand in an inextricable tangle.

For a few moments the blacks held their ground within the entrance to
the street, but the revolvers, rifles and cutlasses of the Frenchmen
crumpled the native spearmen and struck down the black archers with
their bows halfdrawn.

Soon the battle turned to a wild rout, and then to a grim massacre; for
the French sailors had seen bits of D'Arnot's uniform upon several of
the black warriors who opposed them.

They spared the children and those of the women whom they were not
forced to kill in self-defense, but when at length they stopped,
panting, blood covered and sweating, it was because there lived to
oppose them no single warrior of all the savage village of Mbonga.

Carefully they ransacked every hut and corner of the village, but no
sign of D'Arnot could they find.  They questioned the prisoners by
signs, and finally one of the sailors who had served in the French
Congo found that he could make them understand the bastard tongue that
passes for language between the whites and the more degraded tribes of
the coast, but even then they could learn nothing definite regarding
the fate of D'Arnot.

Only excited gestures and expressions of fear could they obtain in
response to their inquiries concerning their fellow; and at last they
became convinced that these were but evidences of the guilt of these
demons who had slaughtered and eaten their comrade two nights before.

At length all hope left them, and they prepared to camp for the night
within the village.  The prisoners were herded into three huts where
they were heavily guarded.  Sentries were posted at the barred gates,
and finally the village was wrapped in the silence of slumber, except
for the wailing of the native women for their dead.


The next morning they set out upon the return march.  Their original
intention had been to burn the village, but this idea was abandoned and
the prisoners were left behind, weeping and moaning, but with roofs to
cover them and a palisade for refuge from the beasts of the jungle.

Slowly the expedition retraced its steps of the preceding day.  Ten
loaded hammocks retarded its pace.  In eight of them lay the more
seriously wounded, while two swung beneath the weight of the dead.

Clayton and Lieutenant Charpentier brought up the rear of the column;
the Englishman silent in respect for the other's grief, for D'Arnot and
Charpentier had been inseparable friends since boyhood.

Clayton could not but realize that the Frenchman felt his grief the
more keenly because D'Arnot's sacrifice had been so futile, since Jane
had been rescued before D'Arnot had fallen into the hands of the
savages, and again because the service in which he had lost his life
had been outside his duty and for strangers and aliens; but when he
spoke of it to Lieutenant Charpentier, the latter shook his head.

"No, Monsieur," he said, "D'Arnot would have chosen to die thus.  I
only grieve that I could not have died for him, or at least with him.
I wish that you could have known him better, Monsieur.  He was indeed
an officer and a gentleman--a title conferred on many, but deserved by
so few.

"He did not die futilely, for his death in the cause of a strange
American girl will make us, his comrades, face our ends the more
bravely, however they may come to us."

Clayton did not reply, but within him rose a new respect for Frenchmen
which remained undimmed ever after.

It was quite late when they reached the cabin by the beach.  A single
shot before they emerged from the jungle had announced to those in camp
as well as on the ship that the expedition had been too late--for it
had been prearranged that when they came within a mile or two of camp
one shot was to be fired to denote failure, or three for success, while
two would have indicated that they had found no sign of either D'Arnot
or his black captors.

So it was a solemn party that awaited their coming, and few words were
spoken as the dead and wounded men were tenderly placed in boats and
rowed silently toward the cruiser.

Clayton, exhausted from his five days of laborious marching through the
jungle and from the effects of his two battles with the blacks, turned
toward the cabin to seek a mouthful of food and then the comparative
ease of his bed of grasses after two nights in the jungle.

By the cabin door stood Jane.

"The poor lieutenant?" she asked.  "Did you find no trace of him?"

"We were too late, Miss Porter," he replied sadly.

"Tell me.  What had happened?" she asked.

"I cannot, Miss Porter, it is too horrible."

"You do not mean that they had tortured him?" she whispered.

"We do not know what they did to him BEFORE they killed him," he
answered, his face drawn with fatigue and the sorrow he felt for poor
D'Arnot and he emphasized the word before.

"BEFORE they killed him!  What do you mean?  They are not--?  They are
not--?"

She was thinking of what Clayton had said of the forest man's probable
relationship to this tribe and she could not frame the awful word.

"Yes, Miss Porter, they were--cannibals," he said, almost bitterly, for
to him too had suddenly come the thought of the forest man, and the
strange, unaccountable jealousy he had felt two days before swept over
him once more.

And then in sudden brutality that was as unlike Clayton as courteous
consideration is unlike an ape, he blurted out:

"When your forest god left you he was doubtless hurrying to the feast."

He was sorry ere the words were spoken though he did not know how
cruelly they had cut the girl.  His regret was for his baseless
disloyalty to one who had saved the lives of every member of his party,
and offered harm to none.

The girl's head went high.

"There could be but one suitable reply to your assertion, Mr. Clayton,"
she said icily, "and I regret that I am not a man, that I might make
it."  She turned quickly and entered the cabin.

Clayton was an Englishman, so the girl had passed quite out of sight
before he deduced what reply a man would have made.

"Upon my word," he said ruefully, "she called me a liar.  And I fancy I
jolly well deserved it," he added thoughtfully.  "Clayton, my boy, I
know you are tired out and unstrung, but that's no reason why you
should make an ass of yourself.  You'd better go to bed."

But before he did so he called gently to Jane upon the opposite side of
the sailcloth partition, for he wished to apologize, but he might as
well have addressed the Sphinx.  Then he wrote upon a piece of paper
and shoved it beneath the partition.

Jane saw the little note and ignored it, for she was very angry and
hurt and mortified, but--she was a woman, and so eventually she picked
it up and read it.

MY DEAR MISS PORTER:

I had no reason to insinuate what I did.  My only excuse is that my
nerves must be unstrung--which is no excuse at all.

Please try and think that I did not say it.  I am very sorry.  I would
not have hurt YOU, above all others in the world.  Say that you forgive
me.

              WM. CECIL CLAYTON.


"He did think it or he never would have said it," reasoned the girl,
"but it cannot be true--oh, I know it is not true!"

One sentence in the letter frightened her:  "I would not have hurt YOU
above all others in the world."

A week ago that sentence would have filled her with delight, now it
depressed her.

She wished she had never met Clayton.  She was sorry that she had ever
seen the forest god.  No, she was glad.  And there was that other note
she had found in the grass before the cabin the day after her return
from the jungle, the love note signed by Tarzan of the Apes.

Who could be this new suitor?  If he were another of the wild denizens
of this terrible forest what might he not do to claim her?

"Esmeralda!  Wake up," she cried.

"You make me so irritable, sleeping there peacefully when you know
perfectly well that the world is filled with sorrow."

"Gaberelle!" screamed Esmeralda, sitting up.  "What is it now?  A
hipponocerous?  Where is he, Miss Jane?"

"Nonsense, Esmeralda, there is nothing.  Go back to sleep.  You are bad
enough asleep, but you are infinitely worse awake."

"Yes honey, but what's the matter with you, precious?  You acts sort of
disgranulated this evening."

"Oh, Esmeralda, I'm just plain ugly to-night," said the girl.  "Don't
pay any attention to me--that's a dear."

"Yes, honey; now you go right to sleep.  Your nerves are all on edge.
What with all these ripotamuses and man eating geniuses that Mister
Philander been telling about--Lord, it ain't no wonder we all get
nervous prosecution."

Jane crossed the little room, laughing, and kissing the faithful woman,
bid Esmeralda good night.




Chapter XXIII

Brother Men.


When D'Arnot regained consciousness, he found himself lying upon a bed
of soft ferns and grasses beneath a little "A" shaped shelter of boughs.

At his feet an opening looked out upon a green sward, and at a little
distance beyond was the dense wall of jungle and forest.

He was very lame and sore and weak, and as full consciousness returned
he felt the sharp torture of many cruel wounds and the dull aching of
every bone and muscle in his body as a result of the hideous beating he
had received.

Even the turning of his head caused him such excruciating agony that he
lay still with closed eyes for a long time.

He tried to piece out the details of his adventure prior to the time he
lost consciousness to see if they would explain his present
whereabouts--he wondered if he were among friends or foes.

At length he recollected the whole hideous scene at the stake, and
finally recalled the strange white figure in whose arms he had sunk
into oblivion.

D'Arnot wondered what fate lay in store for him now.  He could neither
see nor hear any signs of life about him.

The incessant hum of the jungle--the rustling of millions of
leaves--the buzz of insects--the voices of the birds and monkeys seemed
blended into a strangely soothing purr, as though he lay apart, far
from the myriad life whose sounds came to him only as a blurred echo.

At length he fell into a quiet slumber, nor did he awake again until
afternoon.

Once more he experienced the strange sense of utter bewilderment that
had marked his earlier awakening, but soon he recalled the recent past,
and looking through the opening at his feet he saw the figure of a man
squatting on his haunches.

The broad, muscular back was turned toward him, but, tanned though it
was, D'Arnot saw that it was the back of a white man, and he thanked
God.

The Frenchman called faintly.  The man turned, and rising, came toward
the shelter.  His face was very handsome--the handsomest, thought
D'Arnot, that he had ever seen.

Stooping, he crawled into the shelter beside the wounded officer, and
placed a cool hand upon his forehead.

D'Arnot spoke to him in French, but the man only shook his head--sadly,
it seemed to the Frenchman.

Then D'Arnot tried English, but still the man shook his head.  Italian,
Spanish and German brought similar discouragement.

D'Arnot knew a few words of Norwegian, Russian, Greek, and also had a
smattering of the language of one of the West Coast negro tribes--the
man denied them all.

After examining D'Arnot's wounds the man left the shelter and
disappeared.  In half an hour he was back with fruit and a hollow
gourd-like vegetable filled with water.

D'Arnot drank and ate a little.  He was surprised that he had no fever.
Again he tried to converse with his strange nurse, but the attempt was
useless.

Suddenly the man hastened from the shelter only to return a few minutes
later with several pieces of bark and--wonder of wonders--a lead pencil.

Squatting beside D'Arnot he wrote for a minute on the smooth inner
surface of the bark; then he handed it to the Frenchman.

D'Arnot was astonished to see, in plain print-like characters, a
message in English:


I am Tarzan of the Apes.  Who are you?  Can you read this language?


D'Arnot seized the pencil--then he stopped.  This strange man wrote
English--evidently he was an Englishman.

"Yes," said D'Arnot, "I read English.  I speak it also.  Now we may
talk.  First let me thank you for all that you have done for me."

The man only shook his head and pointed to the pencil and the bark.

"MON DIEU!" cried D'Arnot.  "If you are English why is it then that you
cannot speak English?"

And then in a flash it came to him--the man was a mute, possibly a deaf
mute.

So D'Arnot wrote a message on the bark, in English.


I am Paul d'Arnot, Lieutenant in the navy of France.  I thank you for
what you have done for me.  You have saved my life, and all that I have
is yours.  May I ask how it is that one who writes English does not
speak it?


Tarzan's reply filled D'Arnot with still greater wonder:


I speak only the language of my tribe--the great apes who were
Kerchak's; and a little of the languages of Tantor, the elephant, and
Numa, the lion, and of the other folks of the jungle I understand.
With a human being I have never spoken, except once with Jane Porter,
by signs.  This is the first time I have spoken with another of my kind
through written words.


D'Arnot was mystified.  It seemed incredible that there lived upon
earth a full-grown man who had never spoken with a fellow man, and
still more preposterous that such a one could read and write.

He looked again at Tarzan's message--"except once, with Jane Porter."
That was the American girl who had been carried into the jungle by a
gorilla.

A sudden light commenced to dawn on D'Arnot--this then was the
"gorilla."  He seized the pencil and wrote:


Where is Jane Porter?


And Tarzan replied, below:


Back with her people in the cabin of Tarzan of the Apes.


She is not dead then?  Where was she?  What happened to her?


She is not dead.  She was taken by Terkoz to be his wife; but Tarzan of
the Apes took her away from Terkoz and killed him before he could harm
her.

None in all the jungle may face Tarzan of the Apes in battle, and live.
I am Tarzan of the Apes--mighty fighter.

D'Arnot wrote:


I am glad she is safe.  It pains me to write, I will rest a while.


And then Tarzan:


Yes, rest.  When you are well I shall take you back to your people.


For many days D'Arnot lay upon his bed of soft ferns.  The second day a
fever had come and D'Arnot thought that it meant infection and he knew
that he would die.

An idea came to him.  He wondered why he had not thought of it before.

He called Tarzan and indicated by signs that he would write, and when
Tarzan had fetched the bark and pencil, D'Arnot wrote:


Can you go to my people and lead them here?  I will write a message
that you may take to them, and they will follow you.


Tarzan shook his head and taking the bark, wrote:


I had thought of that--the first day; but I dared not.  The great apes
come often to this spot, and if they found you here, wounded and alone,
they would kill you.


D'Arnot turned on his side and closed his eyes.  He did not wish to
die; but he felt that he was going, for the fever was mounting higher
and higher.  That night he lost consciousness.

For three days he was in delirium, and Tarzan sat beside him and bathed
his head and hands and washed his wounds.

On the fourth day the fever broke as suddenly as it had come, but it
left D'Arnot a shadow of his former self, and very weak.  Tarzan had to
lift him that he might drink from the gourd.

The fever had not been the result of infection, as D'Arnot had thought,
but one of those that commonly attack whites in the jungles of Africa,
and either kill or leave them as suddenly as D'Arnot's had left him.

Two days later, D'Arnot was tottering about the amphitheater, Tarzan's
strong arm about him to keep him from falling.

They sat beneath the shade of a great tree, and Tarzan found some
smooth bark that they might converse.

D'Arnot wrote the first message:


What can I do to repay you for all that you have done for me?


And Tarzan, in reply:


Teach me to speak the language of men.


And so D'Arnot commenced at once, pointing out familiar objects and
repeating their names in French, for he thought that it would be easier
to teach this man his own language, since he understood it himself best
of all.

It meant nothing to Tarzan, of course, for he could not tell one
language from another, so when he pointed to the word man which he had
printed upon a piece of bark he learned from D'Arnot that it was
pronounced HOMME, and in the same way he was taught to pronounce ape,
SINGE and tree, ARBRE.

He was a most eager student, and in two more days had mastered so much
French that he could speak little sentences such as:  "That is a tree,"
"this is grass," "I am hungry," and the like, but D'Arnot found that it
was difficult to teach him the French construction upon a foundation of
English.

The Frenchman wrote little lessons for him in English and had Tarzan
repeat them in French, but as a literal translation was usually very
poor French Tarzan was often confused.

D'Arnot realized now that he had made a mistake, but it seemed too late
to go back and do it all over again and force Tarzan to unlearn all
that he had learned, especially as they were rapidly approaching a
point where they would be able to converse.

On the third day after the fever broke Tarzan wrote a message asking
D'Arnot if he felt strong enough to be carried back to the cabin.
Tarzan was as anxious to go as D'Arnot, for he longed to see Jane again.

It had been hard for him to remain with the Frenchman all these days
for that very reason, and that he had unselfishly done so spoke more
glowingly of his nobility of character than even did his rescuing the
French officer from Mbonga's clutches.

D'Arnot, only too willing to attempt the journey, wrote:


But you cannot carry me all the distance through this tangled forest.


Tarzan laughed.

"MAIS OUI," he said, and D'Arnot laughed aloud to hear the phrase that
he used so often glide from Tarzan's tongue.

So they set out, D'Arnot marveling as had Clayton and Jane at the
wondrous strength and agility of the apeman.

Mid-afternoon brought them to the clearing, and as Tarzan dropped to
earth from the branches of the last tree his heart leaped and bounded
against his ribs in anticipation of seeing Jane so soon again.

No one was in sight outside the cabin, and D'Arnot was perplexed to
note that neither the cruiser nor the Arrow was at anchor in the bay.

An atmosphere of loneliness pervaded the spot, which caught suddenly at
both men as they strode toward the cabin.

Neither spoke, yet both knew before they opened the closed door what
they would find beyond.

Tarzan lifted the latch and pushed the great door in upon its wooden
hinges.  It was as they had feared.  The cabin was deserted.

The men turned and looked at one another.  D'Arnot knew that his people
thought him dead; but Tarzan thought only of the woman who had kissed
him in love and now had fled from him while he was serving one of her
people.

A great bitterness rose in his heart.  He would go away, far into the
jungle and join his tribe.  Never would he see one of his own kind
again, nor could he bear the thought of returning to the cabin.  He
would leave that forever behind him with the great hopes he had nursed
there of finding his own race and becoming a man among men.

And the Frenchman?  D'Arnot?  What of him?  He could get along as
Tarzan had.  Tarzan did not want to see him more.  He wanted to get
away from everything that might remind him of Jane.

As Tarzan stood upon the threshold brooding, D'Arnot had entered the
cabin.  Many comforts he saw that had been left behind.  He recognized
numerous articles from the cruiser--a camp oven, some kitchen utensils,
a rifle and many rounds of ammunition, canned foods, blankets, two
chairs and a cot--and several books and periodicals, mostly American.

"They must intend returning," thought D'Arnot.

He walked over to the table that John Clayton had built so many years
before to serve as a desk, and on it he saw two notes addressed to
Tarzan of the Apes.

One was in a strong masculine hand and was unsealed.  The other, in a
woman's hand, was sealed.

"Here are two messages for you, Tarzan of the Apes," cried D'Arnot,
turning toward the door; but his companion was not there.

D'Arnot walked to the door and looked out.  Tarzan was nowhere in
sight.  He called aloud but there was no response.

"MON DIEU!" exclaimed D'Arnot, "he has left me.  I feel it.  He has
gone back into his jungle and left me here alone."

And then he remembered the look on Tarzan's face when they had
discovered that the cabin was empty--such a look as the hunter sees in
the eyes of the wounded deer he has wantonly brought down.

The man had been hard hit--D'Arnot realized it now--but why?  He could
not understand.

The Frenchman looked about him.  The loneliness and the horror of the
place commenced to get on his nerves--already weakened by the ordeal of
suffering and sickness he had passed through.

To be left here alone beside this awful jungle--never to hear a human
voice or see a human face--in constant dread of savage beasts and more
terribly savage men--a prey to solitude and hopelessness.  It was awful.

And far to the east Tarzan of the Apes was speeding through the middle
terrace back to his tribe.  Never had he traveled with such reckless
speed.  He felt that he was running away from himself--that by hurtling
through the forest like a frightened squirrel he was escaping from his
own thoughts.  But no matter how fast he went he found them always with
him.

He passed above the sinuous body of Sabor, the lioness, going in the
opposite direction--toward the cabin, thought Tarzan.

What could D'Arnot do against Sabor--or if Bolgani, the gorilla, should
come upon him--or Numa, the lion, or cruel Sheeta?

Tarzan paused in his flight.

"What are you, Tarzan?" he asked aloud.  "An ape or a man?"

"If you are an ape you will do as the apes would do--leave one of your
kind to die in the jungle if it suited your whim to go elsewhere.

"If you are a man, you will return to protect your kind.  You will not
run away from one of your own people, because one of them has run away
from you."


D'Arnot closed the cabin door.  He was very nervous.  Even brave men,
and D'Arnot was a brave man, are sometimes frightened by solitude.

He loaded one of the rifles and placed it within easy reach.  Then he
went to the desk and took up the unsealed letter addressed to Tarzan.

Possibly it contained word that his people had but left the beach
temporarily.  He felt that it would be no breach of ethics to read this
letter, so he took the enclosure from the envelope and read:

TO TARZAN OF THE APES:


We thank you for the use of your cabin, and are sorry that you did not
permit us the pleasure of seeing and thanking you in person.

We have harmed nothing, but have left many things for you which may add
to your comfort and safety here in your lonely home.

If you know the strange white man who saved our lives so many times,
and brought us food, and if you can converse with him, thank him, also,
for his kindness.

We sail within the hour, never to return; but we wish you and that
other jungle friend to know that we shall always thank you for what you
did for strangers on your shore, and that we should have done
infinitely more to reward you both had you given us the opportunity.

              Very respectfully,
              WM. CECIL CLAYTON.


"'Never to return,'" muttered D'Arnot, and threw himself face downward
upon the cot.

An hour later he started up listening.  Something was at the door
trying to enter.

D'Arnot reached for the loaded rifle and placed it to his shoulder.

Dusk was falling, and the interior of the cabin was very dark; but the
man could see the latch moving from its place.

He felt his hair rising upon his scalp.

Gently the door opened until a thin crack showed something standing
just beyond.

D'Arnot sighted along the blue barrel at the crack of the door--and
then he pulled the trigger.




Chapter XXIV

Lost Treasure


When the expedition returned, following their fruitless endeavor to
succor D'Arnot, Captain Dufranne was anxious to steam away as quickly
as possible, and all save Jane had acquiesced.

"No," she said, determinedly, "I shall not go, nor should you, for
there are two friends in that jungle who will come out of it some day
expecting to find us awaiting them.

"Your officer, Captain Dufranne, is one of them, and the forest man who
has saved the lives of every member of my father's party is the other.

"He left me at the edge of the jungle two days ago to hasten to the aid
of my father and Mr. Clayton, as he thought, and he has stayed to
rescue Lieutenant D'Arnot; of that you may be sure.

"Had he been too late to be of service to the lieutenant he would have
been back before now--the fact that he is not back is sufficient proof
to me that he is delayed because Lieutenant D'Arnot is wounded, or he
has had to follow his captors further than the village which your
sailors attacked."

"But poor D'Arnot's uniform and all his belongings were found in that
village, Miss Porter," argued the captain, "and the natives showed
great excitement when questioned as to the white man's fate."

"Yes, Captain, but they did not admit that he was dead and as for his
clothes and accouterments being in their possession--why more civilized
peoples than these poor savage negroes strip their prisoners of every
article of value whether they intend killing them or not.

"Even the soldiers of my own dear South looted not only the living but
the dead.  It is strong circumstantial evidence, I will admit, but it
is not positive proof."

"Possibly your forest man, himself was captured or killed by the
savages," suggested Captain Dufranne.

The girl laughed.

"You do not know him," she replied, a little thrill of pride setting
her nerves a-tingle at the thought that she spoke of her own.

"I admit that he would be worth waiting for, this superman of yours,"
laughed the captain.  "I most certainly should like to see him."

"Then wait for him, my dear captain," urged the girl, "for I intend
doing so."

The Frenchman would have been a very much surprised man could he have
interpreted the true meaning of the girl's words.

They had been walking from the beach toward the cabin as they talked,
and now they joined a little group sitting on camp stools in the shade
of a great tree beside the cabin.

Professor Porter was there, and Mr. Philander and Clayton, with
Lieutenant Charpentier and two of his brother officers, while Esmeralda
hovered in the background, ever and anon venturing opinions and
comments with the freedom of an old and much-indulged family servant.

The officers arose and saluted as their superior approached, and
Clayton surrendered his camp stool to Jane.

"We were just discussing poor Paul's fate," said Captain Dufranne.
"Miss Porter insists that we have no absolute proof of his death--nor
have we.  And on the other hand she maintains that the continued
absence of your omnipotent jungle friend indicates that D'Arnot is
still in need of his services, either because he is wounded, or still
is a prisoner in a more distant native village."

"It has been suggested," ventured Lieutenant Charpentier, "that the
wild man may have been a member of the tribe of blacks who attacked our
party--that he was hastening to aid THEM--his own people."

Jane shot a quick glance at Clayton.

"It seems vastly more reasonable," said Professor Porter.

"I do not agree with you," objected Mr. Philander.  "He had ample
opportunity to harm us himself, or to lead his people against us.
Instead, during our long residence here, he has been uniformly
consistent in his role of protector and provider."

"That is true," interjected Clayton, "yet we must not overlook the fact
that except for himself the only human beings within hundreds of miles
are savage cannibals.  He was armed precisely as are they, which
indicates that he has maintained relations of some nature with them,
and the fact that he is but one against possibly thousands suggests
that these relations could scarcely have been other than friendly."

"It seems improbable then that he is not connected with them," remarked
the captain; "possibly a member of this tribe."

"Otherwise," added another of the officers, "how could he have lived a
sufficient length of time among the savage denizens of the jungle,
brute and human, to have become proficient in woodcraft, or in the use
of African weapons."

"You are judging him according to your own standards, gentlemen," said
Jane.  "An ordinary white man such as any of you--pardon me, I did not
mean just that--rather, a white man above the ordinary in physique and
intelligence could never, I grant you, have lived a year alone and
naked in this tropical jungle; but this man not only surpasses the
average white man in strength and agility, but as far transcends our
trained athletes and 'strong men' as they surpass a day-old babe; and
his courage and ferocity in battle are those of the wild beast."

"He has certainly won a loyal champion, Miss Porter," said Captain
Dufranne, laughing.  "I am sure that there be none of us here but would
willingly face death a hundred times in its most terrifying forms to
deserve the tributes of one even half so loyal--or so beautiful."

"You would not wonder that I defend him," said the girl, "could you
have seen him as I saw him, battling in my behalf with that huge hairy
brute.

"Could you have seen him charge the monster as a bull might charge a
grizzly--absolutely without sign of fear or hesitation--you would have
believed him more than human.

"Could you have seen those mighty muscles knotting under the brown
skin--could you have seen them force back those awful fangs--you too
would have thought him invincible.

"And could you have seen the chivalrous treatment which he accorded a
strange girl of a strange race, you would feel the same absolute
confidence in him that I feel."

"You have won your suit, my fair pleader," cried the captain.  "This
court finds the defendant not guilty, and the cruiser shall wait a few
days longer that he may have an opportunity to come and thank the
divine Portia."

"For the Lord's sake honey," cried Esmeralda.  "You all don't mean to
tell ME that you're going to stay right here in this here land of
carnivable animals when you all got the opportunity to escapade on that
boat?  Don't you tell me THAT, honey."

"Why, Esmeralda!  You should be ashamed of yourself," cried Jane.  "Is
this any way to show your gratitude to the man who saved your life
twice?"

"Well, Miss Jane, that's all jest as you say; but that there forest man
never did save us to stay here.  He done save us so we all could get
AWAY from here.  I expect he be mighty peevish when he find we ain't
got no more sense than to stay right here after he done give us the
chance to get away.

"I hoped I'd never have to sleep in this here geological garden another
night and listen to all them lonesome noises that come out of that
jumble after dark."

"I don't blame you a bit, Esmeralda," said Clayton, "and you certainly
did hit it off right when you called them 'lonesome' noises.  I never
have been able to find the right word for them but that's it, don't you
know, lonesome noises."

"You and Esmeralda had better go and live on the cruiser," said Jane,
in fine scorn.  "What would you think if you HAD to live all of your
life in that jungle as our forest man has done?"

"I'm afraid I'd be a blooming bounder as a wild man," laughed Clayton,
ruefully.  "Those noises at night make the hair on my head bristle.  I
suppose that I should be ashamed to admit it, but it's the truth."

"I don't know about that," said Lieutenant Charpentier.  "I never
thought much about fear and that sort of thing--never tried to
determine whether I was a coward or brave man; but the other night as
we lay in the jungle there after poor D'Arnot was taken, and those
jungle noises rose and fell around us I began to think that I was a
coward indeed.  It was not the roaring and growling of the big beasts
that affected me so much as it was the stealthy noises--the ones that
you heard suddenly close by and then listened vainly for a repetition
of--the unaccountable sounds as of a great body moving almost
noiselessly, and the knowledge that you didn't KNOW how close it was,
or whether it were creeping closer after you ceased to hear it?  It was
those noises--and the eyes.

"MON DIEU!  I shall see them in the dark forever--the eyes that you
see, and those that you don't see, but feel--ah, they are the worst."

All were silent for a moment, and then Jane spoke.

"And he is out there," she said, in an awe-hushed whisper.  "Those eyes
will be glaring at him to-night, and at your comrade Lieutenant
D'Arnot.  Can you leave them, gentlemen, without at least rendering
them the passive succor which remaining here a few days longer might
insure them?"

"Tut, tut, child," said Professor Porter.  "Captain Dufranne is willing
to remain, and for my part I am perfectly willing, perfectly
willing--as I always have been to humor your childish whims."

"We can utilize the morrow in recovering the chest, Professor,"
suggested Mr. Philander.

"Quite so, quite so, Mr. Philander, I had almost forgotten the
treasure," exclaimed Professor Porter.  "Possibly we can borrow some
men from Captain Dufranne to assist us, and one of the prisoners to
point out the location of the chest."

"Most assuredly, my dear Professor, we are all yours to command," said
the captain.

And so it was arranged that on the next day Lieutenant Charpentier was
to take a detail of ten men, and one of the mutineers of the Arrow as a
guide, and unearth the treasure; and that the cruiser would remain for
a full week in the little harbor.  At the end of that time it was to be
assumed that D'Arnot was truly dead, and that the forest man would not
return while they remained.  Then the two vessels were to leave with
all the party.

Professor Porter did not accompany the treasure-seekers on the
following day, but when he saw them returning empty-handed toward noon,
he hastened forward to meet them--his usual preoccupied indifference
entirely vanished, and in its place a nervous and excited manner.

"Where is the treasure?" he cried to Clayton, while yet a hundred feet
separated them.

Clayton shook his head.

"Gone," he said, as he neared the professor.

"Gone!  It cannot be.  Who could have taken it?" cried Professor Porter.

"God only knows, Professor," replied Clayton.  "We might have thought
the fellow who guided us was lying about the location, but his surprise
and consternation on finding no chest beneath the body of the murdered
Snipes were too real to be feigned.  And then our spades showed us that
SOMETHING had been buried beneath the corpse, for a hole had been there
and it had been filled with loose earth."

"But who could have taken it?" repeated Professor Porter.

"Suspicion might naturally fall on the men of the cruiser," said
Lieutenant Charpentier, "but for the fact that sub-lieutenant Janviers
here assures me that no men have had shore leave--that none has been on
shore since we anchored here except under command of an officer.  I do
not know that you would suspect our men, but I am glad that there is
now no chance for suspicion to fall on them," he concluded.

"It would never have occurred to me to suspect the men to whom we owe
so much," replied Professor Porter, graciously.  "I would as soon
suspect my dear Clayton here, or Mr. Philander."

The Frenchmen smiled, both officers and sailors.  It was plain to see
that a burden had been lifted from their minds.

"The treasure has been gone for some time," continued Clayton.  "In
fact the body fell apart as we lifted it, which indicates that whoever
removed the treasure did so while the corpse was still fresh, for it
was intact when we first uncovered it."

"There must have been several in the party," said Jane, who had joined
them.  "You remember that it took four men to carry it."

"By jove!" cried Clayton.  "That's right.  It must have been done by a
party of blacks.  Probably one of them saw the men bury the chest and
then returned immediately after with a party of his friends, and
carried it off."

"Speculation is futile," said Professor Porter sadly.  "The chest is
gone.  We shall never see it again, nor the treasure that was in it."

Only Jane knew what the loss meant to her father, and none there knew
what it meant to her.

Six days later Captain Dufranne announced that they would sail early on
the morrow.

Jane would have begged for a further reprieve, had it not been that she
too had begun to believe that her forest lover would return no more.

In spite of herself she began to entertain doubts and fears.  The
reasonableness of the arguments of these disinterested French officers
commenced to convince her against her will.

That he was a cannibal she would not believe, but that he was an
adopted member of some savage tribe at length seemed possible to her.

She would not admit that he could be dead.  It was impossible to
believe that that perfect body, so filled with triumphant life, could
ever cease to harbor the vital spark--as soon believe that immortality
were dust.

As Jane permitted herself to harbor these thoughts, others equally
unwelcome forced themselves upon her.

If he belonged to some savage tribe he had a savage wife--a dozen of
them perhaps--and wild, half-caste children.  The girl shuddered, and
when they told her that the cruiser would sail on the morrow she was
almost glad.

It was she, though, who suggested that arms, ammunition, supplies and
comforts be left behind in the cabin, ostensibly for that intangible
personality who had signed himself Tarzan of the Apes, and for D'Arnot
should he still be living, but really, she hoped, for her forest
god--even though his feet should prove of clay.

And at the last minute she left a message for him, to be transmitted by
Tarzan of the Apes.

She was the last to leave the cabin, returning on some trivial pretext
after the others had started for the boat.

She kneeled down beside the bed in which she had spent so many nights,
and offered up a prayer for the safety of her primeval man, and
crushing his locket to her lips she murmured:

"I love you, and because I love you I believe in you.  But if I did not
believe, still should I love.  Had you come back for me, and had there
been no other way, I would have gone into the jungle with you--forever."




Chapter XXV

The Outpost of the World


With the report of his gun D'Arnot saw the door fly open and the figure
of a man pitch headlong within onto the cabin floor.

The Frenchman in his panic raised his gun to fire again into the
prostrate form, but suddenly in the half dusk of the open door he saw
that the man was white and in another instant realized that he had shot
his friend and protector, Tarzan of the Apes.

With a cry of anguish D'Arnot sprang to the ape-man's side, and
kneeling, lifted the latter's head in his arms--calling Tarzan's name
aloud.

There was no response, and then D'Arnot placed his ear above the man's
heart.  To his joy he heard its steady beating beneath.

Carefully he lifted Tarzan to the cot, and then, after closing and
bolting the door, he lighted one of the lamps and examined the wound.

The bullet had struck a glancing blow upon the skull.  There was an
ugly flesh wound, but no signs of a fracture of the skull.

D'Arnot breathed a sigh of relief, and went about bathing the blood
from Tarzan's face.

Soon the cool water revived him, and presently he opened his eyes to
look in questioning surprise at D'Arnot.

The latter had bound the wound with pieces of cloth, and as he saw that
Tarzan had regained consciousness he arose and going to the table wrote
a message, which he handed to the ape-man, explaining the terrible
mistake he had made and how thankful he was that the wound was not more
serious.

Tarzan, after reading the message, sat on the edge of the couch and
laughed.


"It is nothing," he said in French, and then, his vocabulary failing
him, he wrote:

You should have seen what Bolgani did to me, and Kerchak, and Terkoz,
before I killed them--then you would laugh at such a little scratch.


D'Arnot handed Tarzan the two messages that had been left for him.

Tarzan read the first one through with a look of sorrow on his face.
The second one he turned over and over, searching for an opening--he
had never seen a sealed envelope before.  At length he handed it to
D'Arnot.

The Frenchman had been watching him, and knew that Tarzan was puzzled
over the envelope.  How strange it seemed that to a full-grown white
man an envelope was a mystery.  D'Arnot opened it and handed the letter
back to Tarzan.

Sitting on a camp stool the ape-man spread the written sheet before him
and read:

TO TARZAN OF THE APES:

Before I leave let me add my thanks to those of Mr. Clayton for the
kindness you have shown in permitting us the use of your cabin.

That you never came to make friends with us has been a great regret to
us.  We should have liked so much to have seen and thanked our host.

There is another I should like to thank also, but he did not come back,
though I cannot believe that he is dead.

I do not know his name.  He is the great white giant who wore the
diamond locket upon his breast.

If you know him and can speak his language carry my thanks to him, and
tell him that I waited seven days for him to return.

Tell him, also, that in my home in America, in the city of Baltimore,
there will always be a welcome for him if he cares to come.

I found a note you wrote me lying among the leaves beneath a tree near
the cabin.  I do not know how you learned to love me, who have never
spoken to me, and I am very sorry if it is true, for I have already
given my heart to another.

But know that I am always your friend,
                                  JANE PORTER.


Tarzan sat with gaze fixed upon the floor for nearly an hour.  It was
evident to him from the notes that they did not know that he and Tarzan
of the Apes were one and the same.

"I have given my heart to another," he repeated over and over again to
himself.

Then she did not love him!  How could she have pretended love, and
raised him to such a pinnacle of hope only to cast him down to such
utter depths of despair!

Maybe her kisses were only signs of friendship.  How did he know, who
knew nothing of the customs of human beings?

Suddenly he arose, and, bidding D'Arnot good night as he had learned to
do, threw himself upon the couch of ferns that had been Jane Porter's.

D'Arnot extinguished the lamp, and lay down upon the cot.

For a week they did little but rest, D'Arnot coaching Tarzan in French.
At the end of that time the two men could converse quite easily.

One night, as they were sitting within the cabin before retiring,
Tarzan turned to D'Arnot.

"Where is America?" he said.

D'Arnot pointed toward the northwest.

"Many thousands of miles across the ocean," he replied.  "Why?"

"I am going there."

D'Arnot shook his head.

"It is impossible, my friend," he said.

Tarzan rose, and, going to one of the cupboards, returned with a
well-thumbed geography.

Turning to a map of the world, he said:

"I have never quite understood all this; explain it to me, please."

When D'Arnot had done so, showing him that the blue represented all the
water on the earth, and the bits of other colors the continents and
islands, Tarzan asked him to point out the spot where they now were.

D'Arnot did so.

"Now point out America," said Tarzan.

And as D'Arnot placed his finger upon North America, Tarzan smiled and
laid his palm upon the page, spanning the great ocean that lay between
the two continents.

"You see it is not so very far," he said; "scarce the width of my hand."

D'Arnot laughed.  How could he make the man understand?

Then he took a pencil and made a tiny point upon the shore of Africa.

"This little mark," he said, "is many times larger upon this map than
your cabin is upon the earth.  Do you see now how very far it is?"

Tarzan thought for a long time.

"Do any white men live in Africa?" he asked.

"Yes."

"Where are the nearest?"

D'Arnot pointed out a spot on the shore just north of them.

"So close?" asked Tarzan, in surprise.

"Yes," said D'Arnot; "but it is not close."

"Have they big boats to cross the ocean?"

"Yes."

"We shall go there to-morrow," announced Tarzan.

Again D'Arnot smiled and shook his head.

"It is too far.  We should die long before we reached them."

"Do you wish to stay here then forever?" asked Tarzan.

"No," said D'Arnot.

"Then we shall start to-morrow.  I do not like it here longer.  I
should rather die than remain here."

"Well," answered D'Arnot, with a shrug, "I do not know, my friend, but
that I also would rather die than remain here.  If you go, I shall go
with you."

"It is settled then," said Tarzan.  "I shall start for America
to-morrow."

"How will you get to America without money?" asked D'Arnot.

"What is money?" inquired Tarzan.

It took a long time to make him understand even imperfectly.

"How do men get money?" he asked at last.

"They work for it."

"Very well.  I will work for it, then."

"No, my friend," returned D'Arnot, "you need not worry about money, nor
need you work for it.  I have enough money for two--enough for twenty.
Much more than is good for one man and you shall have all you need if
ever we reach civilization."

So on the following day they started north along the shore.  Each man
carrying a rifle and ammunition, beside bedding and some food and
cooking utensils.

The latter seemed to Tarzan a most useless encumbrance, so he threw his
away.

"But you must learn to eat cooked food, my friend," remonstrated
D'Arnot.  "No civilized men eat raw flesh."

"There will be time enough when I reach civilization," said Tarzan.  "I
do not like the things and they only spoil the taste of good meat."

For a month they traveled north.  Sometimes finding food in plenty and
again going hungry for days.

They saw no signs of natives nor were they molested by wild beasts.
Their journey was a miracle of ease.

Tarzan asked questions and learned rapidly.  D'Arnot taught him many of
the refinements of civilization--even to the use of knife and fork; but
sometimes Tarzan would drop them in disgust and grasp his food in his
strong brown hands, tearing it with his molars like a wild beast.

Then D'Arnot would expostulate with him, saying:

"You must not eat like a brute, Tarzan, while I am trying to make a
gentleman of you.  MON DIEU!  Gentlemen do not thus--it is terrible."

Tarzan would grin sheepishly and pick up his knife and fork again, but
at heart he hated them.

On the journey he told D'Arnot about the great chest he had seen the
sailors bury; of how he had dug it up and carried it to the gathering
place of the apes and buried it there.

"It must be the treasure chest of Professor Porter," said D'Arnot.  "It
is too bad, but of course you did not know."

Then Tarzan recalled the letter written by Jane to her friend--the one
he had stolen when they first came to his cabin, and now he knew what
was in the chest and what it meant to Jane.

"To-morrow we shall go back after it," he announced to D'Arnot.

"Go back?" exclaimed D'Arnot.  "But, my dear fellow, we have now been
three weeks upon the march.  It would require three more to return to
the treasure, and then, with that enormous weight which required, you
say, four sailors to carry, it would be months before we had again
reached this spot."

"It must be done, my friend," insisted Tarzan.  "You may go on toward
civilization, and I will return for the treasure.  I can go very much
faster alone."

"I have a better plan, Tarzan," exclaimed D'Arnot.  "We shall go on
together to the nearest settlement, and there we will charter a boat
and sail back down the coast for the treasure and so transport it
easily.  That will be safer and quicker and also not require us to be
separated.  What do you think of that plan?"

"Very well," said Tarzan.  "The treasure will be there whenever we go
for it; and while I could fetch it now, and catch up with you in a moon
or two, I shall feel safer for you to know that you are not alone on
the trail.  When I see how helpless you are, D'Arnot, I often wonder
how the human race has escaped annihilation all these ages which you
tell me about.  Why, Sabor, single handed, could exterminate a thousand
of you."

D'Arnot laughed.

"You will think more highly of your genus when you have seen its armies
and navies, its great cities, and its mighty engineering works.  Then
you will realize that it is mind, and not muscle, that makes the human
animal greater than the mighty beasts of your jungle.

"Alone and unarmed, a single man is no match for any of the larger
beasts; but if ten men were together, they would combine their wits and
their muscles against their savage enemies, while the beasts, being
unable to reason, would never think of combining against the men.
Otherwise, Tarzan of the Apes, how long would you have lasted in the
savage wilderness?"

"You are right, D'Arnot," replied Tarzan, "for if Kerchak had come to
Tublat's aid that night at the Dum-Dum, there would have been an end of
me.  But Kerchak could never think far enough ahead to take advantage
of any such opportunity.  Even Kala, my mother, could never plan ahead.
She simply ate what she needed when she needed it, and if the supply
was very scarce, even though she found plenty for several meals, she
would never gather any ahead.

"I remember that she used to think it very silly of me to burden myself
with extra food upon the march, though she was quite glad to eat it
with me, if the way chanced to be barren of sustenance."

"Then you knew your mother, Tarzan?" asked D'Arnot, in surprise.

"Yes.  She was a great, fine ape, larger than I, and weighing twice as
much."

"And your father?" asked D'Arnot.

"I did not know him.  Kala told me he was a white ape, and hairless
like myself.  I know now that he must have been a white man."

D'Arnot looked long and earnestly at his companion.

"Tarzan," he said at length, "it is impossible that the ape, Kala, was
your mother.  If such a thing can be, which I doubt, you would have
inherited some of the characteristics of the ape, but you have not--you
are pure man, and, I should say, the offspring of highly bred and
intelligent parents.  Have you not the slightest clue to your past?"

"Not the slightest," replied Tarzan.

"No writings in the cabin that might have told something of the lives
of its original inmates?"

"I have read everything that was in the cabin with the exception of one
book which I know now to be written in a language other than English.
Possibly you can read it."

Tarzan fished the little black diary from the bottom of his quiver, and
handed it to his companion.

D'Arnot glanced at the title page.

"It is the diary of John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, an English nobleman,
and it is written in French," he said.

Then he proceeded to read the diary that had been written over twenty
years before, and which recorded the details of the story which we
already know--the story of adventure, hardships and sorrow of John
Clayton and his wife Alice, from the day they left England until an
hour before he was struck down by Kerchak.

D'Arnot read aloud.  At times his voice broke, and he was forced to
stop reading for the pitiful hopelessness that spoke between the lines.

Occasionally he glanced at Tarzan; but the ape-man sat upon his
haunches, like a carven image, his eyes fixed upon the ground.

Only when the little babe was mentioned did the tone of the diary alter
from the habitual note of despair which had crept into it by degrees
after the first two months upon the shore.

Then the passages were tinged with a subdued happiness that was even
sadder than the rest.

One entry showed an almost hopeful spirit.

To-day our little boy is six months old.  He is sitting in Alice's lap
beside the table where I am writing--a happy, healthy, perfect child.

Somehow, even against all reason, I seem to see him a grown man, taking
his father's place in the world--the second John Clayton--and bringing
added honors to the house of Greystoke.

There--as though to give my prophecy the weight of his endorsement--he
has grabbed my pen in his chubby fists and with his inkbegrimed little
fingers has placed the seal of his tiny finger prints upon the page.


And there, on the margin of the page, were the partially blurred
imprints of four wee fingers and the outer half of the thumb.

When D'Arnot had finished the diary the two men sat in silence for some
minutes.

"Well!  Tarzan of the Apes, what think you?" asked D'Arnot.  "Does not
this little book clear up the mystery of your parentage?

"Why man, you are Lord Greystoke."

"The book speaks of but one child," he replied.  "Its little skeleton
lay in the crib, where it died crying for nourishment, from the first
time I entered the cabin until Professor Porter's party buried it, with
its father and mother, beside the cabin.

"No, that was the babe the book speaks of--and the mystery of my origin
is deeper than before, for I have thought much of late of the
possibility of that cabin having been my birthplace.  I am afraid that
Kala spoke the truth," he concluded sadly.

D'Arnot shook his head.  He was unconvinced, and in his mind had sprung
the determination to prove the correctness of his theory, for he had
discovered the key which alone could unlock the mystery, or consign it
forever to the realms of the unfathomable.

A week later the two men came suddenly upon a clearing in the forest.

In the distance were several buildings surrounded by a strong palisade.
Between them and the enclosure stretched a cultivated field in which a
number of negroes were working.

The two halted at the edge of the jungle.

Tarzan fitted his bow with a poisoned arrow, but D'Arnot placed a hand
upon his arm.

"What would you do, Tarzan?" he asked.

"They will try to kill us if they see us," replied Tarzan.  "I prefer
to be the killer."

"Maybe they are friends," suggested D'Arnot.

"They are black," was Tarzan's only reply.

And again he drew back his shaft.

"You must not, Tarzan!" cried D'Arnot.  "White men do not kill
wantonly.  MON DIEU! but you have much to learn.

"I pity the ruffian who crosses you, my wild man, when I take you to
Paris.  I will have my hands full keeping your neck from beneath the
guillotine."

Tarzan lowered his bow and smiled.

"I do not know why I should kill the blacks back there in my jungle,
yet not kill them here.  Suppose Numa, the lion, should spring out upon
us, I should say, then, I presume: Good morning, Monsieur Numa, how is
Madame Numa; eh?"

"Wait until the blacks spring upon you," replied D'Arnot, "then you may
kill them.  Do not assume that men are your enemies until they prove
it."

"Come," said Tarzan, "let us go and present ourselves to be killed,"
and he started straight across the field, his head high held and the
tropical sun beating upon his smooth, brown skin.

Behind him came D'Arnot, clothed in some garments which had been
discarded at the cabin by Clayton when the officers of the French
cruiser had fitted him out in more presentable fashion.

Presently one of the blacks looked up, and beholding Tarzan, turned,
shrieking, toward the palisade.

In an instant the air was filled with cries of terror from the fleeing
gardeners, but before any had reached the palisade a white man emerged
from the enclosure, rifle in hand, to discover the cause of the
commotion.

What he saw brought his rifle to his shoulder, and Tarzan of the Apes
would have felt cold lead once again had not D'Arnot cried loudly to
the man with the leveled gun:

"Do not fire!  We are friends!"

"Halt, then!" was the reply.

"Stop, Tarzan!" cried D'Arnot.  "He thinks we are enemies."

Tarzan dropped into a walk, and together he and D'Arnot advanced toward
the white man by the gate.

The latter eyed them in puzzled bewilderment.

"What manner of men are you?" he asked, in French.

"White men," replied D'Arnot.  "We have been lost in the jungle for a
long time."

The man had lowered his rifle and now advanced with outstretched hand.

"I am Father Constantine of the French Mission here," he said, "and I
am glad to welcome you."

"This is Monsieur Tarzan, Father Constantine," replied D'Arnot,
indicating the ape-man; and as the priest extended his hand to Tarzan,
D'Arnot added: "and I am Paul D'Arnot, of the French Navy."

Father Constantine took the hand which Tarzan extended in imitation of
the priest's act, while the latter took in the superb physique and
handsome face in one quick, keen glance.

And thus came Tarzan of the Apes to the first outpost of civilization.

For a week they remained there, and the ape-man, keenly observant,
learned much of the ways of men; meanwhile black women sewed white duck
garments for himself and D'Arnot so that they might continue their
journey properly clothed.




Chapter XXVI

The Height of Civilization


Another month brought them to a little group of buildings at the mouth
of a wide river, and there Tarzan saw many boats, and was filled with
the timidity of the wild thing by the sight of many men.

Gradually he became accustomed to the strange noises and the odd ways
of civilization, so that presently none might know that two short
months before, this handsome Frenchman in immaculate white ducks, who
laughed and chatted with the gayest of them, had been swinging naked
through primeval forests to pounce upon some unwary victim, which, raw,
was to fill his savage belly.

The knife and fork, so contemptuously flung aside a month before,
Tarzan now manipulated as exquisitely as did the polished D'Arnot.

So apt a pupil had he been that the young Frenchman had labored
assiduously to make of Tarzan of the Apes a polished gentleman in so
far as nicety of manners and speech were concerned.

"God made you a gentleman at heart, my friend," D'Arnot had said; "but
we want His works to show upon the exterior also."

As soon as they had reached the little port, D'Arnot had cabled his
government of his safety, and requested a three-months' leave, which
had been granted.

He had also cabled his bankers for funds, and the enforced wait of a
month, under which both chafed, was due to their inability to charter a
vessel for the return to Tarzan's jungle after the treasure.

During their stay at the coast town "Monsieur Tarzan" became the wonder
of both whites and blacks because of several occurrences which to
Tarzan seemed the merest of nothings.

Once a huge black, crazed by drink, had run amuck and terrorized the
town, until his evil star had led him to where the black-haired French
giant lolled upon the veranda of the hotel.

Mounting the broad steps, with brandished knife, the Negro made
straight for a party of four men sitting at a table sipping the
inevitable absinthe.

Shouting in alarm, the four took to their heels, and then the black
spied Tarzan.

With a roar he charged the ape-man, while half a hundred heads peered
from sheltering windows and doorways to witness the butchering of the
poor Frenchman by the giant black.

Tarzan met the rush with the fighting smile that the joy of battle
always brought to his lips.

As the Negro closed upon him, steel muscles gripped the black wrist of
the uplifted knife-hand, and a single swift wrench left the hand
dangling below a broken bone.

With the pain and surprise, the madness left the black man, and as
Tarzan dropped back into his chair the fellow turned, crying with
agony, and dashed wildly toward the native village.

On another occasion as Tarzan and D'Arnot sat at dinner with a number
of other whites, the talk fell upon lions and lion hunting.

Opinion was divided as to the bravery of the king of beasts--some
maintaining that he was an arrant coward, but all agreeing that it was
with a feeling of greater security that they gripped their express
rifles when the monarch of the jungle roared about a camp at night.

D'Arnot and Tarzan had agreed that his past be kept secret, and so none
other than the French officer knew of the ape-man's familiarity with
the beasts of the jungle.

"Monsieur Tarzan has not expressed himself," said one of the party.  "A
man of his prowess who has spent some time in Africa, as I understand
Monsieur Tarzan has, must have had experiences with lions--yes?"

"Some," replied Tarzan, dryly.  "Enough to know that each of you are
right in your judgment of the characteristics of the lions--you have
met.  But one might as well judge all blacks by the fellow who ran
amuck last week, or decide that all whites are cowards because one has
met a cowardly white.

"There is as much individuality among the lower orders, gentlemen, as
there is among ourselves.  Today we may go out and stumble upon a lion
which is over-timid--he runs away from us.  To-morrow we may meet his
uncle or his twin brother, and our friends wonder why we do not return
from the jungle.  For myself, I always assume that a lion is ferocious,
and so I am never caught off my guard."

"There would be little pleasure in hunting," retorted the first
speaker, "if one is afraid of the thing he hunts."

D'Arnot smiled.  Tarzan afraid!

"I do not exactly understand what you mean by fear," said Tarzan.
"Like lions, fear is a different thing in different men, but to me the
only pleasure in the hunt is the knowledge that the hunted thing has
power to harm me as much as I have to harm him.  If I went out with a
couple of rifles and a gun bearer, and twenty or thirty beaters, to
hunt a lion, I should not feel that the lion had much chance, and so
the pleasure of the hunt would be lessened in proportion to the
increased safety which I felt."

"Then I am to take it that Monsieur Tarzan would prefer to go naked
into the jungle, armed only with a jackknife, to kill the king of
beasts," laughed the other, good naturedly, but with the merest touch
of sarcasm in his tone.

"And a piece of rope," added Tarzan.

Just then the deep roar of a lion sounded from the distant jungle, as
though to challenge whoever dared enter the lists with him.

"There is your opportunity, Monsieur Tarzan," bantered the Frenchman.

"I am not hungry," said Tarzan simply.

The men laughed, all but D'Arnot.  He alone knew that a savage beast
had spoken its simple reason through the lips of the ape-man.

"But you are afraid, just as any of us would be, to go out there naked,
armed only with a knife and a piece of rope," said the banterer.  "Is
it not so?"

"No," replied Tarzan.  "Only a fool performs any act without reason."

"Five thousand francs is a reason," said the other.  "I wager you that
amount you cannot bring back a lion from the jungle under the
conditions we have named--naked and armed only with a knife and a piece
of rope."

Tarzan glanced toward D'Arnot and nodded his head.

"Make it ten thousand," said D'Arnot.

"Done," replied the other.

Tarzan arose.

"I shall have to leave my clothes at the edge of the settlement, so
that if I do not return before daylight I shall have something to wear
through the streets."

"You are not going now," exclaimed the wagerer--"at night?"

"Why not?" asked Tarzan.  "Numa walks abroad at night--it will be
easier to find him."

"No," said the other, "I do not want your blood upon my hands.  It will
be foolhardy enough if you go forth by day."

"I shall go now," replied Tarzan, and went to his room for his knife
and rope.

The men accompanied him to the edge of the jungle, where he left his
clothes in a small storehouse.

But when he would have entered the blackness of the undergrowth they
tried to dissuade him; and the wagerer was most insistent of all that
he abandon his foolhardy venture.

"I will accede that you have won," he said, "and the ten thousand
francs are yours if you will but give up this foolish attempt, which
can only end in your death."

Tarzan laughed, and in another moment the jungle had swallowed him.

The men stood silent for some moments and then slowly turned and walked
back to the hotel veranda.

Tarzan had no sooner entered the jungle than he took to the trees, and
it was with a feeling of exultant freedom that he swung once more
through the forest branches.

This was life!  Ah, how he loved it!  Civilization held nothing like
this in its narrow and circumscribed sphere, hemmed in by restrictions
and conventionalities.  Even clothes were a hindrance and a nuisance.

At last he was free.  He had not realized what a prisoner he had been.

How easy it would be to circle back to the coast, and then make toward
the south and his own jungle and cabin.

Now he caught the scent of Numa, for he was traveling up wind.
Presently his quick ears detected the familiar sound of padded feet and
the brushing of a huge, fur-clad body through the undergrowth.

Tarzan came quietly above the unsuspecting beast and silently stalked
him until he came into a little patch of moonlight.

Then the quick noose settled and tightened about the tawny throat, and,
as he had done it a hundred times in the past, Tarzan made fast the end
to a strong branch and, while the beast fought and clawed for freedom,
dropped to the ground behind him, and leaping upon the great back,
plunged his long thin blade a dozen times into the fierce heart.

Then with his foot upon the carcass of Numa, he raised his voice in the
awesome victory cry of his savage tribe.

For a moment Tarzan stood irresolute, swayed by conflicting emotions of
loyalty to D'Arnot and a mighty lust for the freedom of his own jungle.
At last the vision of a beautiful face, and the memory of warm lips
crushed to his dissolved the fascinating picture he had been drawing of
his old life.

The ape-man threw the warm carcass of Numa across his shoulders and
took to the trees once more.

The men upon the veranda had sat for an hour, almost in silence.

They had tried ineffectually to converse on various subjects, and
always the thing uppermost in the mind of each had caused the
conversation to lapse.

"MON DIEU," said the wagerer at length, "I can endure it no longer.  I
am going into the jungle with my express and bring back that mad man."

"I will go with you," said one.

"And I"--"And I"--"And I," chorused the others.

As though the suggestion had broken the spell of some horrid nightmare
they hastened to their various quarters, and presently were headed
toward the jungle--each one heavily armed.

"God!  What was that?" suddenly cried one of the party, an Englishman,
as Tarzan's savage cry came faintly to their ears.

"I heard the same thing once before," said a Belgian, "when I was in
the gorilla country.  My carriers said it was the cry of a great bull
ape who has made a kill."

D'Arnot remembered Clayton's description of the awful roar with which
Tarzan had announced his kills, and he half smiled in spite of the
horror which filled him to think that the uncanny sound could have
issued from a human throat--from the lips of his friend.

As the party stood finally near the edge of the jungle, debating as to
the best distribution of their forces, they were startled by a low
laugh near them, and turning, beheld advancing toward them a giant
figure bearing a dead lion upon its broad shoulders.

Even D'Arnot was thunderstruck, for it seemed impossible that the man
could have so quickly dispatched a lion with the pitiful weapons he had
taken, or that alone he could have borne the huge carcass through the
tangled jungle.

The men crowded about Tarzan with many questions, but his only answer
was a laughing depreciation of his feat.

To Tarzan it was as though one should eulogize a butcher for his
heroism in killing a cow, for Tarzan had killed so often for food and
for self-preservation that the act seemed anything but remarkable to
him.  But he was indeed a hero in the eyes of these men--men accustomed
to hunting big game.

Incidentally, he had won ten thousand francs, for D'Arnot insisted that
he keep it all.

This was a very important item to Tarzan, who was just commencing to
realize the power which lay beyond the little pieces of metal and paper
which always changed hands when human beings rode, or ate, or slept, or
clothed themselves, or drank, or worked, or played, or sheltered
themselves from the rain or cold or sun.

It had become evident to Tarzan that without money one must die.
D'Arnot had told him not to worry, since he had more than enough for
both, but the ape-man was learning many things and one of them was that
people looked down upon one who accepted money from another without
giving something of equal value in exchange.

Shortly after the episode of the lion hunt, D'Arnot succeeded in
chartering an ancient tub for the coastwise trip to Tarzan's
land-locked harbor.

It was a happy morning for them both when the little vessel weighed
anchor and made for the open sea.

The trip to the beach was uneventful, and the morning after they
dropped anchor before the cabin, Tarzan, garbed once more in his jungle
regalia and carrying a spade, set out alone for the amphitheater of the
apes where lay the treasure.

Late the next day he returned, bearing the great chest upon his
shoulder, and at sunrise the little vessel worked through the harbor's
mouth and took up her northward journey.

Three weeks later Tarzan and D'Arnot were passengers on board a French
steamer bound for Lyons, and after a few days in that city D'Arnot took
Tarzan to Paris.

The ape-man was anxious to proceed to America, but D'Arnot insisted
that he must accompany him to Paris first, nor would he divulge the
nature of the urgent necessity upon which he based his demand.

One of the first things which D'Arnot accomplished after their arrival
was to arrange to visit a high official of the police department, an
old friend; and to take Tarzan with him.

Adroitly D'Arnot led the conversation from point to point until the
policeman had explained to the interested Tarzan many of the methods in
vogue for apprehending and identifying criminals.

Not the least interesting to Tarzan was the part played by finger
prints in this fascinating science.

"But of what value are these imprints," asked Tarzan, "when, after a
few years the lines upon the fingers are entirely changed by the
wearing out of the old tissue and the growth of new?"

"The lines never change," replied the official.  "From infancy to
senility the fingerprints of an individual change only in size, except
as injuries alter the loops and whorls.  But if imprints have been
taken of the thumb and four fingers of both hands one must needs lose
all entirely to escape identification."

"It is marvelous," exclaimed D'Arnot.  "I wonder what the lines upon my
own fingers may resemble."

"We can soon see," replied the police officer, and ringing a bell he
summoned an assistant to whom he issued a few directions.

The man left the room, but presently returned with a little hardwood
box which he placed on his superior's desk.

"Now," said the officer, "you shall have your fingerprints in a second."

He drew from the little case a square of plate glass, a little tube of
thick ink, a rubber roller, and a few snowy white cards.

Squeezing a drop of ink onto the glass, he spread it back and forth
with the rubber roller until the entire surface of the glass was
covered to his satisfaction with a very thin and uniform layer of ink.

"Place the four fingers of your right hand upon the glass, thus," he
said to D'Arnot.  "Now the thumb.  That is right.  Now place them in
just the same position upon this card, here, no--a little to the right.
We must leave room for the thumb and the fingers of the left hand.
There, that's it.  Now the same with the left."

"Come, Tarzan," cried D'Arnot, "let's see what your whorls look like."

Tarzan complied readily, asking many questions of the officer during
the operation.

"Do fingerprints show racial characteristics?" he asked.  "Could you
determine, for example, solely from fingerprints whether the subject
was Negro or Caucasian?"

"I think not," replied the officer.

"Could the finger prints of an ape be detected from those of a man?"

"Probably, because the ape's would be far simpler than those of the
higher organism."

"But a cross between an ape and a man might show the characteristics of
either progenitor?" continued Tarzan.

"Yes, I should think likely," responded the official; "but the science
has not progressed sufficiently to render it exact enough in such
matters.  I should hate to trust its findings further than to
differentiate between individuals.  There it is absolute.  No two
people born into the world probably have ever had identical lines upon
all their digits.  It is very doubtful if any single fingerprint will
ever be exactly duplicated by any finger other than the one which
originally made it."

"Does the comparison require much time or labor?" asked D'Arnot.

"Ordinarily but a few moments, if the impressions are distinct."

D'Arnot drew a little black book from his pocket and commenced turning
the pages.

Tarzan looked at the book in surprise.  How did D'Arnot come to have
his book?

Presently D'Arnot stopped at a page on which were five tiny little
smudges.

He handed the open book to the policeman.

"Are these imprints similar to mine or Monsieur Tarzan's or can you say
that they are identical with either?" The officer drew a powerful glass
from his desk and examined all three specimens carefully, making
notations meanwhile upon a pad of paper.

Tarzan realized now what was the meaning of their visit to the police
officer.

The answer to his life's riddle lay in these tiny marks.

With tense nerves he sat leaning forward in his chair, but suddenly he
relaxed and dropped back, smiling.

D'Arnot looked at him in surprise.

"You forget that for twenty years the dead body of the child who made
those fingerprints lay in the cabin of his father, and that all my life
I have seen it lying there," said Tarzan bitterly.

The policeman looked up in astonishment.

"Go ahead, captain, with your examination," said D'Arnot, "we will tell
you the story later--provided Monsieur Tarzan is agreeable."

Tarzan nodded his head.

"But you are mad, my dear D'Arnot," he insisted.  "Those little fingers
are buried on the west coast of Africa."

"I do not know as to that, Tarzan," replied D'Arnot.  "It is possible,
but if you are not the son of John Clayton then how in heaven's name
did you come into that God forsaken jungle where no white man other
than John Clayton had ever set foot?"

"You forget--Kala," said Tarzan.

"I do not even consider her," replied D'Arnot.

The friends had walked to the broad window overlooking the boulevard as
they talked.  For some time they stood there gazing out upon the busy
throng beneath, each wrapped in his own thoughts.

"It takes some time to compare finger prints," thought D'Arnot, turning
to look at the police officer.

To his astonishment he saw the official leaning back in his chair
hastily scanning the contents of the little black diary.

D'Arnot coughed.  The policeman looked up, and, catching his eye,
raised his finger to admonish silence.  D'Arnot turned back to the
window, and presently the police officer spoke.

"Gentlemen," he said.

Both turned toward him.

"There is evidently a great deal at stake which must hinge to a greater
or lesser extent upon the absolute correctness of this comparison.  I
therefore ask that you leave the entire matter in my hands until
Monsieur Desquerc, our expert returns.  It will be but a matter of a
few days."

"I had hoped to know at once," said D'Arnot.  "Monsieur Tarzan sails
for America tomorrow."

"I will promise that you can cable him a report within two weeks,"
replied the officer; "but what it will be I dare not say.  There are
resemblances, yet--well, we had better leave it for Monsieur Desquerc
to solve."




Chapter XXVII

The Giant Again


A taxicab drew up before an oldfashioned residence upon the outskirts
of Baltimore.

A man of about forty, well built and with strong, regular features,
stepped out, and paying the chauffeur dismissed him.

A moment later the passenger was entering the library of the old home.

"Ah, Mr. Canler!" exclaimed an old man, rising to greet him.

"Good evening, my dear Professor," cried the man, extending a cordial
hand.

"Who admitted you?" asked the professor.

"Esmeralda."

"Then she will acquaint Jane with the fact that you are here," said the
old man.

"No, Professor," replied Canler, "for I came primarily to see you."

"Ah, I am honored," said Professor Porter.

"Professor," continued Robert Canler, with great deliberation, as
though carefully weighing his words, "I have come this evening to speak
with you about Jane.

"You know my aspirations, and you have been generous enough to approve
my suit."

Professor Archimedes Q. Porter fidgeted in his armchair.  The subject
always made him uncomfortable.  He could not understand why.  Canler
was a splendid match.

"But Jane," continued Canler, "I cannot understand her.  She puts me
off first on one ground and then another.  I have always the feeling
that she breathes a sigh of relief every time I bid her good-by."

"Tut, tut," said Professor Porter.  "Tut, tut, Mr. Canler.  Jane is a
most obedient daughter.  She will do precisely as I tell her."

"Then I can still count on your support?" asked Canler, a tone of
relief marking his voice.

"Certainly, sir; certainly, sir," exclaimed Professor Porter.  "How
could you doubt it?"

"There is young Clayton, you know," suggested Canler. "He has been
hanging about for months.  I don't know that Jane cares for him; but
beside his title they say he has inherited a very considerable estate
from his father, and it might not be strange,--if he finally won her,
unless--" and Canler paused.

"Tut--tut, Mr. Canler; unless--what?"

"Unless, you see fit to request that Jane and I be married at once,"
said Canler, slowly and distinctly.

"I have already suggested to Jane that it would be desirable," said
Professor Porter sadly, "for we can no longer afford to keep up this
house, and live as her associations demand."

"What was her reply?" asked Canler.

"She said she was not ready to marry anyone yet," replied Professor
Porter, "and that we could go and live upon the farm in northern
Wisconsin which her mother left her.

"It is a little more than self-supporting.  The tenants have always
made a living from it, and been able to send Jane a trifle beside, each
year.  She is planning on our going up there the first of the week.
Philander and Mr. Clayton have already gone to get things in readiness
for us."

"Clayton has gone there?" exclaimed Canler, visibly chagrined.  "Why
was I not told?  I would gladly have gone and seen that every comfort
was provided."

"Jane feels that we are already too much in your debt, Mr. Canler,"
said Professor Porter.

Canler was about to reply, when the sound of footsteps came from the
hall without, and Jane entered the room.

"Oh, I beg your pardon!" she exclaimed, pausing on the threshold.  "I
thought you were alone, papa."

"It is only I, Jane," said Canler, who had risen, "won't you come in
and join the family group?  We were just speaking of you."

"Thank you," said Jane, entering and taking the chair Canler placed for
her.  "I only wanted to tell papa that Tobey is coming down from the
college tomorrow to pack his books.  I want you to be sure, papa, to
indicate all that you can do without until fall.  Please don't carry
this entire library to Wisconsin, as you would have carried it to
Africa, if I had not put my foot down."

"Was Tobey here?" asked Professor Porter.

"Yes, I just left him.  He and Esmeralda are exchanging religious
experiences on the back porch now."

"Tut, tut, I must see him at once!" cried the professor.  "Excuse me
just a moment, children," and the old man hastened from the room.

As soon as he was out of earshot Canler turned to Jane.

"See here, Jane," he said bluntly.  "How long is this thing going on
like this?  You haven't refused to marry me, but you haven't promised
either.  I want to get the license tomorrow, so that we can be married
quietly before you leave for Wisconsin.  I don't care for any fuss or
feathers, and I'm sure you don't either."

The girl turned cold, but she held her head bravely.

"Your father wishes it, you know," added Canler.

"Yes, I know."

She spoke scarcely above a whisper.

"Do you realize that you are buying me, Mr. Canler?" she said finally,
and in a cold, level voice.  "Buying me for a few paltry dollars?  Of
course you do, Robert Canler, and the hope of just such a contingency
was in your mind when you loaned papa the money for that hair-brained
escapade, which but for a most mysterious circumstance would have been
surprisingly successful.

"But you, Mr. Canler, would have been the most surprised.  You had no
idea that the venture would succeed.  You are too good a businessman
for that.  And you are too good a businessman to loan money for buried
treasure seeking, or to loan money without security--unless you had
some special object in view.

"You knew that without security you had a greater hold on the honor of
the Porters than with it.  You knew the one best way to force me to
marry you, without seeming to force me.

"You have never mentioned the loan.  In any other man I should have
thought that the prompting of a magnanimous and noble character.  But
you are deep, Mr. Robert Canler.  I know you better than you think I
know you.

"I shall certainly marry you if there is no other way, but let us
understand each other once and for all."

While she spoke Robert Canler had alternately flushed and paled, and
when she ceased speaking he arose, and with a cynical smile upon his
strong face, said:

"You surprise me, Jane.  I thought you had more self-control--more
pride.  Of course you are right.  I am buying you, and I knew that you
knew it, but I thought you would prefer to pretend that it was
otherwise.  I should have thought your self respect and your Porter
pride would have shrunk from admitting, even to yourself, that you were
a bought woman.  But have it your own way, dear girl," he added
lightly.  "I am going to have you, and that is all that interests me."

Without a word the girl turned and left the room.

Jane was not married before she left with her father and Esmeralda for
her little Wisconsin farm, and as she coldly bid Robert Canler goodby
as her train pulled out, he called to her that he would join them in a
week or two.

At their destination they were met by Clayton and Mr. Philander in a
huge touring car belonging to the former, and quickly whirled away
through the dense northern woods toward the little farm which the girl
had not visited before since childhood.

The farmhouse, which stood on a little elevation some hundred yards
from the tenant house, had undergone a complete transformation during
the three weeks that Clayton and Mr. Philander had been there.

The former had imported a small army of carpenters and plasterers,
plumbers and painters from a distant city, and what had been but a
dilapidated shell when they reached it was now a cosy little two-story
house filled with every modern convenience procurable in so short a
time.

"Why, Mr. Clayton, what have you done?" cried Jane Porter, her heart
sinking within her as she realized the probable size of the expenditure
that had been made.

"S-sh," cautioned Clayton.  "Don't let your father guess.  If you don't
tell him he will never notice, and I simply couldn't think of him
living in the terrible squalor and sordidness which Mr. Philander and I
found.  It was so little when I would like to do so much, Jane.  For
his sake, please, never mention it."

"But you know that we can't repay you," cried the girl.  "Why do you
want to put me under such terrible obligations?"

"Don't, Jane," said Clayton sadly.  "If it had been just you, believe
me, I wouldn't have done it, for I knew from the start that it would
only hurt me in your eyes, but I couldn't think of that dear old man
living in the hole we found here.  Won't you please believe that I did
it just for him and give me that little crumb of pleasure at least?"

"I do believe you, Mr. Clayton," said the girl, "because I know you are
big enough and generous enough to have done it just for him--and, oh
Cecil, I wish I might repay you as you deserve--as you would wish."

"Why can't you, Jane?"

"Because I love another."

"Canler?"

"No."

"But you are going to marry him.  He told me as much before I left
Baltimore."

The girl winced.

"I do not love him," she said, almost proudly.

"Is it because of the money, Jane?"

She nodded.

"Then am I so much less desirable than Canler?  I have money enough,
and far more, for every need," he said bitterly.

"I do not love you, Cecil," she said, "but I respect you.  If I must
disgrace myself by such a bargain with any man, I prefer that it be one
I already despise.  I should loathe the man to whom I sold myself
without love, whomsoever he might be.  You will be happier," she
concluded, "alone--with my respect and friendship, than with me and my
contempt."

He did not press the matter further, but if ever a man had murder in
his heart it was William Cecil Clayton, Lord Greystoke, when, a week
later, Robert Canler drew up before the farmhouse in his purring six
cylinder.

A week passed; a tense, uneventful, but uncomfortable week for all the
inmates of the little Wisconsin farmhouse.

Canler was insistent that Jane marry him at once.

At length she gave in from sheer loathing of the continued and hateful
importuning.

It was agreed that on the morrow Canler was to drive to town and bring
back the license and a minister.

Clayton had wanted to leave as soon as the plan was announced, but the
girl's tired, hopeless look kept him.  He could not desert her.

Something might happen yet, he tried to console himself by thinking.
And in his heart, he knew that it would require but a tiny spark to
turn his hatred for Canler into the blood lust of the killer.

Early the next morning Canler set out for town.

In the east smoke could be seen lying low over the forest, for a fire
had been raging for a week not far from them, but the wind still lay in
the west and no danger threatened them.

About noon Jane started off for a walk.  She would not let Clayton
accompany her.  She wanted to be alone, she said, and he respected her
wishes.

In the house Professor Porter and Mr. Philander were immersed in an
absorbing discussion of some weighty scientific problem.  Esmeralda
dozed in the kitchen, and Clayton, heavy-eyed after a sleepless night,
threw himself down upon the couch in the living room and soon dropped
into a fitful slumber.

To the east the black smoke clouds rose higher into the heavens,
suddenly they eddied, and then commenced to drift rapidly toward the
west.

On and on they came.  The inmates of the tenant house were gone, for it
was market day, and none was there to see the rapid approach of the
fiery demon.

Soon the flames had spanned the road to the south and cut off Canler's
return.  A little fluctuation of the wind now carried the path of the
forest fire to the north, then blew back and the flames nearly stood
still as though held in leash by some master hand.

Suddenly, out of the northeast, a great black car came careening down
the road.

With a jolt it stopped before the cottage, and a black-haired giant
leaped out to run up onto the porch.  Without a pause he rushed into
the house.  On the couch lay Clayton.  The man started in surprise, but
with a bound was at the side of the sleeping man.

Shaking him roughly by the shoulder, he cried:

"My God, Clayton, are you all mad here?  Don't you know you are nearly
surrounded by fire?  Where is Miss Porter?"

Clayton sprang to his feet.  He did not recognize the man, but he
understood the words and was upon the veranda in a bound.

"Scott!" he cried, and then, dashing back into the house, "Jane!  Jane!
where are you?"

In an instant Esmeralda, Professor Porter and Mr. Philander had joined
the two men.

"Where is Miss Jane?" cried Clayton, seizing Esmeralda by the shoulders
and shaking her roughly.

"Oh, Gaberelle, Mister Clayton, she done gone for a walk."

"Hasn't she come back yet?" and, without waiting for a reply, Clayton
dashed out into the yard, followed by the others.  "Which way did she
go?" cried the black-haired giant of Esmeralda.

"Down that road," cried the frightened woman, pointing toward the south
where a mighty wall of roaring flames shut out the view.

"Put these people in the other car," shouted the stranger to Clayton.
"I saw one as I drove up--and get them out of here by the north road.

"Leave my car here.  If I find Miss Porter we shall need it.  If I
don't, no one will need it.  Do as I say," as Clayton hesitated, and
then they saw the lithe figure bound away cross the clearing toward the
northwest where the forest still stood, untouched by flame.

In each rose the unaccountable feeling that a great responsibility had
been raised from their shoulders; a kind of implicit confidence in the
power of the stranger to save Jane if she could be saved.

"Who was that?" asked Professor Porter.

"I do not know," replied Clayton.  "He called me by name and he knew
Jane, for he asked for her.  And he called Esmeralda by name."

"There was something most startlingly familiar about him," exclaimed
Mr. Philander, "And yet, bless me, I know I never saw him before."

"Tut, tut!" cried Professor Porter.  "Most remarkable!  Who could it
have been, and why do I feel that Jane is safe, now that he has set out
in search of her?"

"I can't tell you, Professor," said Clayton soberly, "but I know I have
the same uncanny feeling."

"But come," he cried, "we must get out of here ourselves, or we shall
be shut off," and the party hastened toward Clayton's car.

When Jane turned to retrace her steps homeward, she was alarmed to note
how near the smoke of the forest fire seemed, and as she hastened
onward her alarm became almost a panic when she perceived that the
rushing flames were rapidly forcing their way between herself and the
cottage.

At length she was compelled to turn into the dense thicket and attempt
to force her way to the west in an effort to circle around the flames
and reach the house.

In a short time the futility of her attempt became apparent and then
her one hope lay in retracing her steps to the road and flying for her
life to the south toward the town.

The twenty minutes that it took her to regain the road was all that had
been needed to cut off her retreat as effectually as her advance had
been cut off before.

A short run down the road brought her to a horrified stand, for there
before her was another wall of flame.  An arm of the main conflagration
had shot out a half mile south of its parent to embrace this tiny strip
of road in its implacable clutches.

Jane knew that it was useless again to attempt to force her way through
the undergrowth.

She had tried it once, and failed.  Now she realized that it would be
but a matter of minutes ere the whole space between the north and the
south would be a seething mass of billowing flames.

Calmly the girl kneeled down in the dust of the roadway and prayed for
strength to meet her fate bravely, and for the delivery of her father
and her friends from death.

Suddenly she heard her name being called aloud through the forest:

"Jane!  Jane Porter!"  It rang strong and clear, but in a strange voice.

"Here!" she called in reply.  "Here!  In the roadway!"

Then through the branches of the trees she saw a figure swinging with
the speed of a squirrel.

A veering of the wind blew a cloud of smoke about them and she could no
longer see the man who was speeding toward her, but suddenly she felt a
great arm about her.  Then she was lifted up, and she felt the rushing
of the wind and the occasional brush of a branch as she was borne along.

She opened her eyes.

Far below her lay the undergrowth and the hard earth.

About her was the waving foliage of the forest.

From tree to tree swung the giant figure which bore her, and it seemed
to Jane that she was living over in a dream the experience that had
been hers in that far African jungle.

Oh, if it were but the same man who had borne her so swiftly through
the tangled verdure on that other day! but that was impossible!  Yet
who else in all the world was there with the strength and agility to do
what this man was now doing?

She stole a sudden glance at the face close to hers, and then she gave
a little frightened gasp.  It was he!

"My forest man!" she murmured.  "No, I must be delirious!"

"Yes, your man, Jane Porter.  Your savage, primeval man come out of the
jungle to claim his mate--the woman who ran away from him," he added
almost fiercely.

"I did not run away," she whispered.  "I would only consent to leave
when they had waited a week for you to return."

They had come to a point beyond the fire now, and he had turned back to
the clearing.

Side by side they were walking toward the cottage.  The wind had
changed once more and the fire was burning back upon itself--another
hour like that and it would be burned out.

"Why did you not return?" she asked.

"I was nursing D'Arnot.  He was badly wounded."

"Ah, I knew it!" she exclaimed.

"They said you had gone to join the blacks--that they were your people."

He laughed.

"But you did not believe them, Jane?"

"No;--what shall I call you?" she asked.  "What is your name?"

"I was Tarzan of the Apes when you first knew me," he said.

"Tarzan of the Apes!" she cried--"and that was your note I answered
when I left?"

"Yes, whose did you think it was?"

"I did not know; only that it could not be yours, for Tarzan of the
Apes had written in English, and you could not understand a word of any
language."

Again he laughed.

"It is a long story, but it was I who wrote what I could not speak--and
now D'Arnot has made matters worse by teaching me to speak French
instead of English.

"Come," he added, "jump into my car, we must overtake your father, they
are only a little way ahead."

As they drove along, he said:

"Then when you said in your note to Tarzan of the Apes that you loved
another--you might have meant me?"

"I might have," she answered, simply.

"But in Baltimore--Oh, how I have searched for you--they told me you
would possibly be married by now.  That a man named Canler had come up
here to wed you.  Is that true?"

"Yes."

"Do you love him?"

"No."

"Do you love me?"

She buried her face in her hands.

"I am promised to another.  I cannot answer you, Tarzan of the Apes,"
she cried.

"You have answered.  Now, tell me why you would marry one you do not
love."

"My father owes him money."

Suddenly there came back to Tarzan the memory of the letter he had
read--and the name Robert Canler and the hinted trouble which he had
been unable to understand then.

He smiled.

"If your father had not lost the treasure you would not feel forced to
keep your promise to this man Canler?"

"I could ask him to release me."

"And if he refused?"

"I have given my promise."

He was silent for a moment.  The car was plunging along the uneven road
at a reckless pace, for the fire showed threateningly at their right,
and another change of the wind might sweep it on with raging fury
across this one avenue of escape.

Finally they passed the danger point, and Tarzan reduced their speed.

"Suppose I should ask him?" ventured Tarzan.

"He would scarcely accede to the demand of a stranger," said the girl.
"Especially one who wanted me himself."

"Terkoz did," said Tarzan, grimly.

Jane shuddered and looked fearfully up at the giant figure beside her,
for she knew that he meant the great anthropoid he had killed in her
defense.

"This is not the African jungle," she said.  "You are no longer a
savage beast.  You are a gentleman, and gentlemen do not kill in cold
blood."

"I am still a wild beast at heart," he said, in a low voice, as though
to himself.

Again they were silent for a time.

"Jane," said the man, at length, "if you were free, would you marry me?"

She did not reply at once, but he waited patiently.

The girl was trying to collect her thoughts.

What did she know of this strange creature at her side?  What did he
know of himself?  Who was he?  Who, his parents?

Why, his very name echoed his mysterious origin and his savage life.

He had no name.  Could she be happy with this jungle waif?  Could she
find anything in common with a husband whose life had been spent in the
tree tops of an African wilderness, frolicking and fighting with fierce
anthropoids; tearing his food from the quivering flank of fresh-killed
prey, sinking his strong teeth into raw flesh, and tearing away his
portion while his mates growled and fought about him for their share?

Could he ever rise to her social sphere?  Could she bear to think of
sinking to his?  Would either be happy in such a horrible misalliance?

"You do not answer," he said.  "Do you shrink from wounding me?"

"I do not know what answer to make," said Jane sadly.  "I do not know
my own mind."

"You do not love me, then?" he asked, in a level tone.

"Do not ask me.  You will be happier without me.  You were never meant
for the formal restrictions and conventionalities of
society--civilization would become irksome to you, and in a little
while you would long for the freedom of your old life--a life to which
I am as totally unfitted as you to mine."

"I think I understand you," he replied quietly.  "I shall not urge you,
for I would rather see you happy than to be happy myself.  I see now
that you could not be happy with--an ape."

There was just the faintest tinge of bitterness in his voice.

"Don't," she remonstrated.  "Don't say that.  You do not understand."

But before she could go on a sudden turn in the road brought them into
the midst of a little hamlet.

Before them stood Clayton's car surrounded by the party he had brought
from the cottage.




Chapter XXVIII

Conclusion


At the sight of Jane, cries of relief and delight broke from every lip,
and as Tarzan's car stopped beside the other, Professor Porter caught
his daughter in his arms.

For a moment no one noticed Tarzan, sitting silently in his seat.

Clayton was the first to remember, and, turning, held out his hand.

"How can we ever thank you?" he exclaimed.  "You have saved us all.
You called me by name at the cottage, but I do not seem to recall
yours, though there is something very familiar about you.  It is as
though I had known you well under very different conditions a long time
ago."

Tarzan smiled as he took the proffered hand.

"You are quite right, Monsieur Clayton," he said, in French.  "You will
pardon me if I do not speak to you in English.  I am just learning it,
and while I understand it fairly well I speak it very poorly."

"But who are you?" insisted Clayton, speaking in French this time
himself.

"Tarzan of the Apes."

Clayton started back in surprise.

"By Jove!" he exclaimed.  "It is true."

And Professor Porter and Mr. Philander pressed forward to add their
thanks to Clayton's, and to voice their surprise and pleasure at seeing
their jungle friend so far from his savage home.

The party now entered the modest little hostelry, where Clayton soon
made arrangements for their entertainment.

They were sitting in the little, stuffy parlor when the distant
chugging of an approaching automobile caught their attention.

Mr. Philander, who was sitting near the window, looked out as the car
drew in sight, finally stopping beside the other automobiles.

"Bless me!" said Mr. Philander, a shade of annoyance in his tone.  "It
is Mr. Canler.  I had hoped, er--I had thought or--er--how very happy
we should be that he was not caught in the fire," he ended lamely.

"Tut, tut!  Mr. Philander," said Professor Porter.  "Tut, tut!  I have
often admonished my pupils to count ten before speaking.  Were I you,
Mr. Philander, I should count at least a thousand, and then maintain a
discreet silence."

"Bless me, yes!" acquiesced Mr. Philander.  "But who is the clerical
appearing gentleman with him?"

Jane blanched.

Clayton moved uneasily in his chair.

Professor Porter removed his spectacles nervously, and breathed upon
them, but replaced them on his nose without wiping.

The ubiquitous Esmeralda grunted.

Only Tarzan did not comprehend.

Presently Robert Canler burst into the room.

"Thank God!" he cried.  "I feared the worst, until I saw your car,
Clayton.  I was cut off on the south road and had to go away back to
town, and then strike east to this road.  I thought we'd never reach
the cottage."

No one seemed to enthuse much.  Tarzan eyed Robert Canler as Sabor eyes
her prey.

Jane glanced at him and coughed nervously.

"Mr. Canler," she said, "this is Monsieur Tarzan, an old friend."

Canler turned and extended his hand.  Tarzan rose and bowed as only
D'Arnot could have taught a gentleman to do it, but he did not seem to
see Canler's hand.

Nor did Canler appear to notice the oversight.

"This is the Reverend Mr. Tousley, Jane," said Canler, turning to the
clerical party behind him.  "Mr. Tousley, Miss Porter."

Mr. Tousley bowed and beamed.

Canler introduced him to the others.

"We can have the ceremony at once, Jane," said Canler.  "Then you and I
can catch the midnight train in town."

Tarzan understood the plan instantly.  He glanced out of half-closed
eyes at Jane, but he did not move.

The girl hesitated.  The room was tense with the silence of taut nerves.

All eyes turned toward Jane, awaiting her reply.

"Can't we wait a few days?" she asked.  "I am all unstrung.  I have
been through so much today."

Canler felt the hostility that emanated from each member of the party.
It made him angry.

"We have waited as long as I intend to wait," he said roughly.  "You
have promised to marry me.  I shall be played with no longer.  I have
the license and here is the preacher.  Come Mr. Tousley; come Jane.
There are plenty of witnesses--more than enough," he added with a
disagreeable inflection; and taking Jane Porter by the arm, he started
to lead her toward the waiting minister.

But scarcely had he taken a single step ere a heavy hand closed upon
his arm with a grip of steel.

Another hand shot to his throat and in a moment he was being shaken
high above the floor, as a cat might shake a mouse.

Jane turned in horrified surprise toward Tarzan.

And, as she looked into his face, she saw the crimson band upon his
forehead that she had seen that other day in far distant Africa, when
Tarzan of the Apes had closed in mortal combat with the great
anthropoid--Terkoz.

She knew that murder lay in that savage heart, and with a little cry of
horror she sprang forward to plead with the ape-man.
 But her fears were more for Tarzan than for Canler.  She
realized the stern retribution which justice metes to the murderer.

Before she could reach them, however, Clayton had jumped to Tarzan's
side and attempted to drag Canler from his grasp.

With a single sweep of one mighty arm the Englishman was hurled across
the room, and then Jane laid a firm white hand upon Tarzan's wrist, and
looked up into his eyes.

"For my sake," she said.

The grasp upon Canler's throat relaxed.

Tarzan looked down into the beautiful face before him.

"Do you wish this to live?" he asked in surprise.

"I do not wish him to die at your hands, my friend," she replied.  "I
do not wish you to become a murderer."

Tarzan removed his hand from Canler's throat.

"Do you release her from her promise?" he asked.  "It is the price of
your life."

Canler, gasping for breath, nodded.

"Will you go away and never molest her further?"

Again the man nodded his head, his face distorted by fear of the death
that had been so close.

Tarzan released him, and Canler staggered toward the door.  In another
moment he was gone, and the terror-stricken preacher with him.

Tarzan turned toward Jane.

"May I speak with you for a moment, alone," he asked.

The girl nodded and started toward the door leading to the narrow
veranda of the little hotel.  She passed out to await Tarzan and so did
not hear the conversation which followed.

"Wait," cried Professor Porter, as Tarzan was about to follow.

The professor had been stricken dumb with surprise by the rapid
developments of the past few minutes.

"Before we go further, sir, I should like an explanation of the events
which have just transpired.  By what right, sir, did you interfere
between my daughter and Mr. Canler?  I had promised him her hand, sir,
and regardless of our personal likes or dislikes, sir, that promise
must be kept."

"I interfered, Professor Porter," replied Tarzan, "because your
daughter does not love Mr. Canler--she does not wish to marry him.
That is enough for me to know."

"You do not know what you have done," said Professor Porter.  "Now he
will doubtless refuse to marry her."

"He most certainly will," said Tarzan, emphatically.

"And further," added Tarzan, "you need not fear that your pride will
suffer, Professor Porter, for you will be able to pay the Canler person
what you owe him the moment you reach home."

"Tut, tut, sir!" exclaimed Professor Porter.  "What do you mean, sir?"

"Your treasure has been found," said Tarzan.

"What--what is that you are saying?" cried the professor.  "You are
mad, man.  It cannot be."

"It is, though.  It was I who stole it, not knowing either its value or
to whom it belonged.  I saw the sailors bury it, and, ape-like, I had
to dig it up and bury it again elsewhere.  When D'Arnot told me what it
was and what it meant to you I returned to the jungle and recovered it.
It had caused so much crime and suffering and sorrow that D'Arnot
thought it best not to attempt to bring the treasure itself on here, as
had been my intention, so I have brought a letter of credit instead.

"Here it is, Professor Porter," and Tarzan drew an envelope from his
pocket and handed it to the astonished professor, "two hundred and
forty-one thousand dollars.  The treasure was most carefully appraised
by experts, but lest there should be any question in your mind, D'Arnot
himself bought it and is holding it for you, should you prefer the
treasure to the credit."

"To the already great burden of the obligations we owe you, sir," said
Professor Porter, with trembling voice, "is now added this greatest of
all services.  You have given me the means to save my honor."

Clayton, who had left the room a moment after Canler, now returned.

"Pardon me," he said.  "I think we had better try to reach town before
dark and take the first train out of this forest.  A native just rode
by from the north, who reports that the fire is moving slowly in this
direction."

This announcement broke up further conversation, and the entire party
went out to the waiting automobiles.

Clayton, with Jane, the professor and Esmeralda occupied Clayton's car,
while Tarzan took Mr. Philander in with him.

"Bless me!" exclaimed Mr. Philander, as the car moved off after
Clayton.  "Who would ever have thought it possible!  The last time I
saw you you were a veritable wild man, skipping about among the
branches of a tropical African forest, and now you are driving me along
a Wisconsin road in a French automobile.  Bless me!  But it is most
remarkable."

"Yes," assented Tarzan, and then, after a pause, "Mr. Philander, do you
recall any of the details of the finding and burying of three skeletons
found in my cabin beside that African jungle?"

"Very distinctly, sir, very distinctly," replied Mr. Philander.

"Was there anything peculiar about any of those skeletons?"

Mr. Philander eyed Tarzan narrowly.

"Why do you ask?"

"It means a great deal to me to know," replied Tarzan.  "Your answer
may clear up a mystery.  It can do no worse, at any rate, than to leave
it still a mystery.  I have been entertaining a theory concerning those
skeletons for the past two months, and I want you to answer my question
to the best of your knowledge--were the three skeletons you buried all
human skeletons?"

"No," said Mr. Philander, "the smallest one, the one found in the crib,
was the skeleton of an anthropoid ape."

"Thank you," said Tarzan.

In the car ahead, Jane was thinking fast and furiously.  She had felt
the purpose for which Tarzan had asked a few words with her, and she
knew that she must be prepared to give him an answer in the very near
future.

He was not the sort of person one could put off, and somehow that very
thought made her wonder if she did not really fear him.

And could she love where she feared?

She realized the spell that had been upon her in the depths of that
far-off jungle, but there was no spell of enchantment now in prosaic
Wisconsin.

Nor did the immaculate young Frenchman appeal to the primal woman in
her, as had the stalwart forest god.

Did she love him?  She did not know--now.

She glanced at Clayton out of the corner of her eye.  Was not here a
man trained in the same school of environment in which she had been
trained--a man with social position and culture such as she had been
taught to consider as the prime essentials to congenial association?

Did not her best judgment point to this young English nobleman, whose
love she knew to be of the sort a civilized woman should crave, as the
logical mate for such as herself?

Could she love Clayton?  She could see no reason why she could not.
Jane was not coldly calculating by nature, but training, environment
and heredity had all combined to teach her to reason even in matters of
the heart.

That she had been carried off her feet by the strength of the young
giant when his great arms were about her in the distant African forest,
and again today, in the Wisconsin woods, seemed to her only
attributable to a temporary mental reversion to type on her part--to
the psychological appeal of the primeval man to the primeval woman in
her nature.

If he should never touch her again, she reasoned, she would never feel
attracted toward him.  She had not loved him, then.  It had been
nothing more than a passing hallucination, super-induced by excitement
and by personal contact.

Excitement would not always mark their future relations, should she
marry him, and the power of personal contact eventually would be dulled
by familiarity.

Again she glanced at Clayton.  He was very handsome and every inch a
gentleman.  She should be very proud of such a husband.

And then he spoke--a minute sooner or a minute later might have made
all the difference in the world to three lives--but chance stepped in
and pointed out to Clayton the psychological moment.

"You are free now, Jane," he said.  "Won't you say yes--I will devote
my life to making you very happy."

"Yes," she whispered.

That evening in the little waiting room at the station Tarzan caught
Jane alone for a moment.

"You are free now, Jane," he said, "and _I_ have come across the ages
out of the dim and distant past from the lair of the primeval man to
claim you--for your sake I have become a civilized man--for your sake I
have crossed oceans and continents--for your sake I will be whatever
you will me to be.  I can make you happy, Jane, in the life you know
and love best.  Will you marry me?"

For the first time she realized the depths of the man's love--all that
he had accomplished in so short a time solely for love of her.  Turning
her head she buried her face in her arms.

What had she done?  Because she had been afraid she might succumb to
the pleas of this giant, she had burned her bridges behind her--in her
groundless apprehension that she might make a terrible mistake, she had
made a worse one.

And then she told him all--told him the truth word by word, without
attempting to shield herself or condone her error.

"What can we do?" he asked.  "You have admitted that you love me.  You
know that I love you; but I do not know the ethics of society by which
you are governed.  I shall leave the decision to you, for you know best
what will be for your eventual welfare."

"I cannot tell him, Tarzan," she said.  "He too, loves me, and he is a
good man.  I could never face you nor any other honest person if I
repudiated my promise to Mr. Clayton.  I shall have to keep it--and you
must help me bear the burden, though we may not see each other again
after tonight."

The others were entering the room now and Tarzan turned toward the
little window.

But he saw nothing outside--within he saw a patch of greensward
surrounded by a matted mass of gorgeous tropical plants and flowers,
and, above, the waving foliage of mighty trees, and, over all, the blue
of an equatorial sky.

In the center of the greensward a young woman sat upon a little mound
of earth, and beside her sat a young giant.  They ate pleasant fruit
and looked into each other's eyes and smiled.  They were very happy,
and they were all alone.

His thoughts were broken in upon by the station agent who entered
asking if there was a gentleman by the name of Tarzan in the party.

"I am Monsieur Tarzan," said the ape-man.

"Here is a message for you, forwarded from Baltimore; it is a cablegram
from Paris."

Tarzan took the envelope and tore it open.  The message was from
D'Arnot.

It read:


Fingerprints prove you Greystoke.  Congratulations.
                                      D'ARNOT.


As Tarzan finished reading, Clayton entered and came toward him with
extended hand.

Here was the man who had Tarzan's title, and Tarzan's estates, and was
going to marry the woman whom Tarzan loved--the woman who loved Tarzan.
A single word from Tarzan would make a great difference in this man's
life.

It would take away his title and his lands and his castles, and--it
would take them away from Jane Porter also.  "I say, old man," cried
Clayton, "I haven't had a chance to thank you for all you've done for
us.  It seems as though you had your hands full saving our lives in
Africa and here.

"I'm awfully glad you came on here.  We must get better acquainted.  I
often thought about you, you know, and the remarkable circumstances of
your environment.

"If it's any of my business, how the devil did you ever get into that
bally jungle?"

"I was born there," said Tarzan, quietly.  "My mother was an Ape, and
of course she couldn't tell me much about it.  I never knew who my
father was."


                  FOR THE
      FURTHER ADVENTURES OF LORD GREYSTOKE
          READ THE RETURN OF TARZAN









End of Project Gutenberg's Tarzan of the Apes, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN OF THE APES ***

***** This file should be named 78.txt or 78.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/78/

Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Beasts of Tarzan, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Beasts of Tarzan

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Release Date: June 23, 2008 [EBook #85]
[Last updated: April 8, 2012]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEASTS OF TARZAN ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.









The Beasts of Tarzan


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs




To Joan Burroughs




                         CONTENTS


 CHAPTER

  1  Kidnapped
  2  Marooned
  3  Beasts at Bay
  4  Sheeta
  5  Mugambi
  6  A Hideous Crew
  7  Betrayed
  8  The Dance of Death
  9  Chivalry or Villainy
 10  The Swede
 11  Tambudza
 12  A Black Scoundrel
 13  Escape
 14  Alone in the Jungle
 15  Down the Ugambi
 16  In the Darkness of the Night
 17  On the Deck of the "Kincaid"
 18  Paulvitch Plots Revenge
 19  The Last of the "Kincaid"
 20  Jungle Island Again
 21  The Law of the Jungle




Chapter 1

Kidnapped


"The entire affair is shrouded in mystery," said D'Arnot.  "I have it
on the best of authority that neither the police nor the special agents
of the general staff have the faintest conception of how it was
accomplished.  All they know, all that anyone knows, is that Nikolas
Rokoff has escaped."

John Clayton, Lord Greystoke--he who had been "Tarzan of the Apes"--sat
in silence in the apartments of his friend, Lieutenant Paul D'Arnot, in
Paris, gazing meditatively at the toe of his immaculate boot.

His mind revolved many memories, recalled by the escape of his
arch-enemy from the French military prison to which he had been
sentenced for life upon the testimony of the ape-man.

He thought of the lengths to which Rokoff had once gone to compass his
death, and he realized that what the man had already done would
doubtless be as nothing by comparison with what he would wish and plot
to do now that he was again free.

Tarzan had recently brought his wife and infant son to London to escape
the discomforts and dangers of the rainy season upon their vast estate
in Uziri--the land of the savage Waziri warriors whose broad African
domains the ape-man had once ruled.

He had run across the Channel for a brief visit with his old friend,
but the news of the Russian's escape had already cast a shadow upon his
outing, so that though he had but just arrived he was already
contemplating an immediate return to London.

"It is not that I fear for myself, Paul," he said at last.   "Many
times in the past have I thwarted Rokoff's designs upon my life; but
now there are others to consider.  Unless I misjudge the man, he would
more quickly strike at me through my wife or son than directly at me,
for he doubtless realizes that in no other way could he inflict greater
anguish upon me.  I must go back to them at once, and remain with them
until Rokoff is recaptured--or dead."

As these two talked in Paris, two other men were talking together in a
little cottage upon the outskirts of London.   Both were dark,
sinister-looking men.

One was bearded, but the other, whose face wore the pallor of long
confinement within doors, had but a few days' growth of black beard
upon his face.  It was he who was speaking.

"You must needs shave off that beard of yours, Alexis," he said to his
companion.  "With it he would recognize you on the instant.  We must
separate here in the hour, and when we meet again upon the deck of the
Kincaid, let us hope that we shall have with us two honoured guests who
little anticipate the pleasant voyage we have planned for them.

"In two hours I should be upon my way to Dover with one of them, and by
tomorrow night, if you follow my instructions carefully, you should
arrive with the other, provided, of course, that he returns to London
as quickly as I presume he will.

"There should be both profit and pleasure as well as other good things
to reward our efforts, my dear Alexis.  Thanks to the stupidity of the
French, they have gone to such lengths to conceal the fact of my escape
for these many days that I have had ample opportunity to work out every
detail of our little adventure so carefully that there is little chance
of the slightest hitch occurring to mar our prospects.  And now
good-bye, and good luck!"

Three hours later a messenger mounted the steps to the apartment of
Lieutenant D'Arnot.

"A telegram for Lord Greystoke," he said to the servant who answered
his summons.  "Is he here?"

The man answered in the affirmative, and, signing for the message,
carried it within to Tarzan, who was already preparing to depart for
London.

Tarzan tore open the envelope, and as he read his face went white.

"Read it, Paul," he said, handing the slip of paper to D'Arnot.  "It
has come already."

The Frenchman took the telegram and read:

"Jack stolen from the garden through complicity of new servant.  Come
at once.--JANE."


As Tarzan leaped from the roadster that had met him at the station and
ran up the steps to his London town house he was met at the door by a
dry-eyed but almost frantic woman.

Quickly Jane Porter Clayton narrated all that she had been able to
learn of the theft of the boy.

The baby's nurse had been wheeling him in the sunshine on the walk
before the house when a closed taxicab drew up at the corner of the
street.  The woman had paid but passing attention to the vehicle,
merely noting that it discharged no passenger, but stood at the kerb
with the motor running as though waiting for a fare from the residence
before which it had stopped.

Almost immediately the new houseman, Carl, had come running from the
Greystoke house, saying that the girl's mistress wished to speak with
her for a moment, and that she was to leave little Jack in his care
until she returned.

The woman said that she entertained not the slightest suspicion of the
man's motives until she had reached the doorway of the house, when it
occurred to her to warn him not to turn the carriage so as to permit
the sun to shine in the baby's eyes.

As she turned about to call this to him she was somewhat surprised to
see that he was wheeling the carriage rapidly toward the corner, and at
the same time she saw the door of the taxicab open and a swarthy face
framed for a moment in the aperture.

Intuitively, the danger to the child flashed upon her, and with a
shriek she dashed down the steps and up the walk toward the taxicab,
into which Carl was now handing the baby to the swarthy one within.

Just before she reached the vehicle, Carl leaped in beside his
confederate, slamming the door behind him.  At the same time the
chauffeur attempted to start his machine, but it was evident that
something had gone wrong, as though the gears refused to mesh, and the
delay caused by this, while he pushed the lever into reverse and backed
the car a few inches before again attempting to go ahead, gave the
nurse time to reach the side of the taxicab.

Leaping to the running-board, she had attempted to snatch the baby from
the arms of the stranger, and here, screaming and fighting, she had
clung to her position even after the taxicab had got under way; nor was
it until the machine had passed the Greystoke residence at good speed
that Carl, with a heavy blow to her face, had succeeded in knocking her
to the pavement.

Her screams had attracted servants and members of the families from
residences near by, as well as from the Greystoke home.  Lady Greystoke
had witnessed the girl's brave battle, and had herself tried to reach
the rapidly passing vehicle, but had been too late.

That was all that anyone knew, nor did Lady Greystoke dream of the
possible identity of the man at the bottom of the plot until her
husband told her of the escape of Nikolas Rokoff from the French prison
where they had hoped he was permanently confined.

As Tarzan and his wife stood planning the wisest course to pursue, the
telephone bell rang in the library at their right.  Tarzan quickly
answered the call in person.

"Lord Greystoke?" asked a man's voice at the other end of the line.

"Yes."

"Your son has been stolen," continued the voice, "and I alone may help
you to recover him.  I am conversant with the plot of those who took
him.  In fact, I was a party to it, and was to share in the reward, but
now they are trying to ditch me, and to be quits with them I will aid
you to recover him on condition that you will not prosecute me for my
part in the crime.  What do you say?"

"If you lead me to where my son is hidden," replied the ape-man, "you
need fear nothing from me."

"Good," replied the other.  "But you must come alone to meet me, for it
is enough that I must trust you.  I cannot take the chance of
permitting others to learn my identity."

"Where and when may I meet you?" asked Tarzan.

The other gave the name and location of a public-house on the
water-front at Dover--a place frequented by sailors.

"Come," he concluded, "about ten o'clock tonight.  It would do no good
to arrive earlier.  Your son will be safe enough in the meantime, and I
can then lead you secretly to where he is hidden.  But be sure to come
alone, and under no circumstances notify Scotland Yard, for I know you
well and shall be watching for you.

"Should any other accompany you, or should I see suspicious characters
who might be agents of the police, I shall not meet you, and your last
chance of recovering your son will be gone."

Without more words the man rang off.

Tarzan repeated the gist of the conversation to his wife.   She begged
to be allowed to accompany him, but he insisted that it might result in
the man's carrying out his threat of refusing to aid them if Tarzan did
not come alone, and so they parted, he to hasten to Dover, and she,
ostensibly to wait at home until he should notify her of the outcome of
his mission.

Little did either dream of what both were destined to pass through
before they should meet again, or the far-distant--but why anticipate?

For ten minutes after the ape-man had left her Jane Clayton walked
restlessly back and forth across the silken rugs of the library.  Her
mother heart ached, bereft of its first-born.  Her mind was in an
anguish of hopes and fears.

Though her judgment told her that all would be well were her Tarzan to
go alone in accordance with the mysterious stranger's summons, her
intuition would not permit her to lay aside suspicion of the gravest
dangers to both her husband and her son.

The more she thought of the matter, the more convinced she became that
the recent telephone message might be but a ruse to keep them inactive
until the boy was safely hidden away or spirited out of England.  Or it
might be that it had been simply a bait to lure Tarzan into the hands
of the implacable Rokoff.

With the lodgment of this thought she stopped in wide-eyed terror.
Instantly it became a conviction.  She glanced at the great clock
ticking the minutes in the corner of the library.

It was too late to catch the Dover train that Tarzan was to take.
There was another, later, however, that would bring her to the Channel
port in time to reach the address the stranger had given her husband
before the appointed hour.

Summoning her maid and chauffeur, she issued instructions rapidly.  Ten
minutes later she was being whisked through the crowded streets toward
the railway station.

It was nine-forty-five that night that Tarzan entered the squalid "pub"
on the water-front in Dover.  As he passed into the evil-smelling room
a muffled figure brushed past him toward the street.

"Come, my lord!" whispered the stranger.

The ape-man wheeled about and followed the other into the ill-lit
alley, which custom had dignified with the title of thoroughfare.  Once
outside, the fellow led the way into the darkness, nearer a wharf,
where high-piled bales, boxes, and casks cast dense shadows.  Here he
halted.

"Where is the boy?" asked Greystoke.

"On that small steamer whose lights you can just see yonder," replied
the other.

In the gloom Tarzan was trying to peer into the features of his
companion, but he did not recognize the man as one whom he had ever
before seen.  Had he guessed that his guide was Alexis Paulvitch he
would have realized that naught but treachery lay in the man's heart,
and that danger lurked in the path of every move.

"He is unguarded now," continued the Russian.  "Those who took him feel
perfectly safe from detection, and with the exception of a couple of
members of the crew, whom I have furnished with enough gin to silence
them effectually for hours, there is none aboard the Kincaid.  We can
go aboard, get the child, and return without the slightest fear."

Tarzan nodded.

"Let's be about it, then," he said.

His guide led him to a small boat moored alongside the wharf.   The two
men entered, and Paulvitch pulled rapidly toward the steamer.  The
black smoke issuing from her funnel did not at the time make any
suggestion to Tarzan's mind.  All his thoughts were occupied with the
hope that in a few moments he would again have his little son in his
arms.

At the steamer's side they found a monkey-ladder dangling close above
them, and up this the two men crept stealthily.   Once on deck they
hastened aft to where the Russian pointed to a hatch.

"The boy is hidden there," he said.  "You had better go down after him,
as there is less chance that he will cry in fright than should he find
himself in the arms of a stranger.   I will stand on guard here."

So anxious was Tarzan to rescue the child that he gave not the
slightest thought to the strangeness of all the conditions surrounding
the Kincaid.  That her deck was deserted, though she had steam up, and
from the volume of smoke pouring from her funnel was all ready to get
under way made no impression upon him.

With the thought that in another instant he would fold that precious
little bundle of humanity in his arms, the ape-man swung down into the
darkness below.  Scarcely had he released his hold upon the edge of the
hatch than the heavy covering fell clattering above him.

Instantly he knew that he was the victim of a plot, and that far from
rescuing his son he had himself fallen into the hands of his enemies.
Though he immediately endeavoured to reach the hatch and lift the
cover, he was unable to do so.

Striking a match, he explored his surroundings, finding that a little
compartment had been partitioned off from the main hold, with the hatch
above his head the only means of ingress or egress.  It was evident
that the room had been prepared for the very purpose of serving as a
cell for himself.

There was nothing in the compartment, and no other occupant.   If the
child was on board the Kincaid he was confined elsewhere.

For over twenty years, from infancy to manhood, the ape-man had roamed
his savage jungle haunts without human companionship of any nature.  He
had learned at the most impressionable period of his life to take his
pleasures and his sorrows as the beasts take theirs.

So it was that he neither raved nor stormed against fate, but instead
waited patiently for what might next befall him, though not by any
means without an eye to doing the utmost to succour himself.  To this
end he examined his prison carefully, tested the heavy planking that
formed its walls, and measured the distance of the hatch above him.

And while he was thus occupied there came suddenly to him the vibration
of machinery and the throbbing of the propeller.

The ship was moving!  Where to and to what fate was it carrying him?

And even as these thoughts passed through his mind there came to his
ears above the din of the engines that which caused him to go cold with
apprehension.

Clear and shrill from the deck above him rang the scream of a
frightened woman.




Chapter 2

Marooned


As Tarzan and his guide had disappeared into the shadows upon the dark
wharf the figure of a heavily veiled woman had hurried down the narrow
alley to the entrance of the drinking-place the two men had just
quitted.

Here she paused and looked about, and then as though satisfied that she
had at last reached the place she sought, she pushed bravely into the
interior of the vile den.

A score of half-drunken sailors and wharf-rats looked up at the
unaccustomed sight of a richly gowned woman in their midst.   Rapidly
she approached the slovenly barmaid who stared half in envy, half in
hate, at her more fortunate sister.

"Have you seen a tall, well-dressed man here, but a minute since," she
asked, "who met another and went away with him?"

The girl answered in the affirmative, but could not tell which way the
two had gone.  A sailor who had approached to listen to the
conversation vouchsafed the information that a moment before as he had
been about to enter the "pub" he had seen two men leaving it who walked
toward the wharf.

"Show me the direction they went," cried the woman, slipping a coin
into the man's hand.

The fellow led her from the place, and together they walked quickly
toward the wharf and along it until across the water they saw a small
boat just pulling into the shadows of a near-by steamer.

"There they be," whispered the man.

"Ten pounds if you will find a boat and row me to that steamer," cried
the woman.

"Quick, then," he replied, "for we gotta go it if we're goin' to catch
the Kincaid afore she sails.  She's had steam up for three hours an'
jest been a-waitin' fer that one passenger.   I was a-talkin' to one of
her crew 'arf an hour ago."

As he spoke he led the way to the end of the wharf where he knew
another boat lay moored, and, lowering the woman into it, he jumped in
after and pushed off.  The two were soon scudding over the water.

At the steamer's side the man demanded his pay and, without waiting to
count out the exact amount, the woman thrust a handful of bank-notes
into his outstretched hand.  A single glance at them convinced the
fellow that he had been more than well paid.  Then he assisted her up
the ladder, holding his skiff close to the ship's side against the
chance that this profitable passenger might wish to be taken ashore
later.

But presently the sound of the donkey engine and the rattle of a steel
cable on the hoisting-drum proclaimed the fact that the Kincaid's
anchor was being raised, and a moment later the waiter heard the
propellers revolving, and slowly the little steamer moved away from him
out into the channel.

As he turned to row back to shore he heard a woman's shriek from the
ship's deck.

"That's wot I calls rotten luck," he soliloquized.  "I might jest as
well of 'ad the whole bloomin' wad."


When Jane Clayton climbed to the deck of the Kincaid she found the ship
apparently deserted.  There was no sign of those she sought nor of any
other aboard, and so she went about her search for her husband and the
child she hoped against hope to find there without interruption.

Quickly she hastened to the cabin, which was half above and half below
deck.  As she hurried down the short companion-ladder into the main
cabin, on either side of which were the smaller rooms occupied by the
officers, she failed to note the quick closing of one of the doors
before her.  She passed the full length of the main room, and then
retracing her steps stopped before each door to listen, furtively
trying each latch.

All was silence, utter silence there, in which the throbbing of her own
frightened heart seemed to her overwrought imagination to fill the ship
with its thunderous alarm.

One by one the doors opened before her touch, only to reveal empty
interiors.  In her absorption she did not note the sudden activity upon
the vessel, the purring of the engines, the throbbing of the propeller.
She had reached the last door upon the right now, and as she pushed it
open she was seized from within by a powerful, dark-visaged man, and
drawn hastily into the stuffy, ill-smelling interior.

The sudden shock of fright which the unexpected attack had upon her
drew a single piercing scream from her throat; then the man clapped a
hand roughly over the mouth.

"Not until we are farther from land, my dear," he said.   "Then you may
yell your pretty head off."

Lady Greystoke turned to look into the leering, bearded face so close
to hers.  The man relaxed the pressure of his fingers upon her lips,
and with a little moan of terror as she recognized him the girl shrank
away from her captor.

"Nikolas Rokoff!  M.  Thuran!" she exclaimed.

"Your devoted admirer," replied the Russian, with a low bow.

"My little boy," she said next, ignoring the terms of
endearment--"where is he?  Let me have him.  How could you be so
cruel--even as you--Nikolas Rokoff--cannot be entirely devoid of mercy
and compassion?  Tell me where he is.  Is he aboard this ship?  Oh,
please, if such a thing as a heart beats within your breast, take me to
my baby!"

"If you do as you are bid no harm will befall him," replied Rokoff.
"But remember that it is your own fault that you are here.   You came
aboard voluntarily, and you may take the consequences.   I little
thought," he added to himself, "that any such good luck as this would
come to me."

He went on deck then, locking the cabin-door upon his prisoner, and for
several days she did not see him.  The truth of the matter being that
Nikolas Rokoff was so poor a sailor that the heavy seas the Kincaid
encountered from the very beginning of her voyage sent the Russian to
his berth with a bad attack of sea-sickness.

During this time her only visitor was an uncouth Swede, the Kincaid's
unsavoury cook, who brought her meals to her.   His name was Sven
Anderssen, his one pride being that his patronymic was spelt with a
double "s."

The man was tall and raw-boned, with a long yellow moustache, an
unwholesome complexion, and filthy nails.   The very sight of him with
one grimy thumb buried deep in the lukewarm stew, that seemed, from the
frequency of its repetition, to constitute the pride of his culinary
art, was sufficient to take away the girl's appetite.

His small, blue, close-set eyes never met hers squarely.   There was a
shiftiness of his whole appearance that even found expression in the
cat-like manner of his gait, and to it all a sinister suggestion was
added by the long slim knife that always rested at his waist, slipped
through the greasy cord that supported his soiled apron.  Ostensibly it
was but an implement of his calling; but the girl could never free
herself of the conviction that it would require less provocation to
witness it put to other and less harmless uses.

His manner toward her was surly, yet she never failed to meet him with
a pleasant smile and a word of thanks when he brought her food to her,
though more often than not she hurled the bulk of it through the tiny
cabin port the moment that the door closed behind him.

During the days of anguish that followed Jane Clayton's imprisonment,
but two questions were uppermost in her mind--the whereabouts of her
husband and her son.  She fully believed that the baby was aboard the
Kincaid, provided that he still lived, but whether Tarzan had been
permitted to live after having been lured aboard the evil craft she
could not guess.

She knew, of course, the deep hatred that the Russian felt for the
Englishman, and she could think of but one reason for having him
brought aboard the ship--to dispatch him in comparative safety in
revenge for his having thwarted Rokoff's pet schemes, and for having
been at last the means of landing him in a French prison.


Tarzan, on his part, lay in the darkness of his cell, ignorant of the
fact that his wife was a prisoner in the cabin almost above his head.

The same Swede that served Jane brought his meals to him, but, though
on several occasions Tarzan had tried to draw the man into
conversation, he had been unsuccessful.   He had hoped to learn through
this fellow whether his little son was aboard the Kincaid, but to every
question upon this or kindred subjects the fellow returned but one
reply, "Ay tank it blow purty soon purty hard." So after several
attempts Tarzan gave it up.

For weeks that seemed months to the two prisoners the little steamer
forged on they knew not where.  Once the Kincaid stopped to coal, only
immediately to take up the seemingly interminable voyage.

Rokoff had visited Jane Clayton but once since he had locked her in the
tiny cabin.  He had come gaunt and hollow-eyed from a long siege of
sea-sickness.  The object of his visit was to obtain from her her
personal cheque for a large sum in return for a guarantee of her
personal safety and return to England.

"When you set me down safely in any civilized port, together with my
son and my husband," she replied, "I will pay you in gold twice the
amount you ask; but until then you shall not have a cent, nor the
promise of a cent under any other conditions."

"You will give me the cheque I ask," he replied with a snarl, "or
neither you nor your child nor your husband will ever again set foot
within any port, civilized or otherwise."

"I would not trust you," she replied.  "What guarantee have I that you
would not take my money and then do as you pleased with me and mine
regardless of your promise?"

"I think you will do as I bid," he said, turning to leave the cabin.
"Remember that I have your son--if you chance to hear the agonized wail
of a tortured child it may console you to reflect that it is because of
your stubbornness that the baby suffers--and that it is your baby."

"You would not do it!" cried the girl.  "You would not--could not be so
fiendishly cruel!"

"It is not I that am cruel, but you," he returned, "for you permit a
paltry sum of money to stand between your baby and immunity from
suffering."

The end of it was that Jane Clayton wrote out a cheque of large
denomination and handed it to Nikolas Rokoff, who left her cabin with a
grin of satisfaction upon his lips.

The following day the hatch was removed from Tarzan's cell, and as he
looked up he saw Paulvitch's head framed in the square of light above
him.

"Come up," commanded the Russian.  "But bear in mind that you will be
shot if you make a single move to attack me or any other aboard the
ship."

The ape-man swung himself lightly to the deck.  About him, but at a
respectful distance, stood a half-dozen sailors armed with rifles and
revolvers.  Facing him was Paulvitch.

Tarzan looked about for Rokoff, who he felt sure must be aboard, but
there was no sign of him.

"Lord Greystoke," commenced the Russian, "by your continued and wanton
interference with M.  Rokoff and his plans you have at last brought
yourself and your family to this unfortunate extremity.  You have only
yourself to thank.   As you may imagine, it has cost M.  Rokoff a large
amount of money to finance this expedition, and, as you are the sole
cause of it, he naturally looks to you for reimbursement.

"Further, I may say that only by meeting M.  Rokoff's just demands may
you avert the most unpleasant consequences to your wife and child, and
at the same time retain your own life and regain your liberty."

"What is the amount?" asked Tarzan.  "And what assurance have I that
you will live up to your end of the agreement?  I have little reason to
trust two such scoundrels as you and Rokoff, you know."

The Russian flushed.

"You are in no position to deliver insults," he said.   "You have no
assurance that we will live up to our agreement other than my word, but
you have before you the assurance that we can make short work of you if
you do not write out the cheque we demand.

"Unless you are a greater fool than I imagine, you should know that
there is nothing that would give us greater pleasure than to order
these men to fire.  That we do not is because we have other plans for
punishing you that would be entirely upset by your death."

"Answer one question," said Tarzan.  "Is my son on board this ship?"

"No," replied Alexis Paulvitch, "your son is quite safe elsewhere; nor
will he be killed until you refuse to accede to our fair demands.  If
it becomes necessary to kill you, there will be no reason for not
killing the child, since with you gone the one whom we wish to punish
through the boy will be gone, and he will then be to us only a constant
source of danger and embarrassment.  You see, therefore, that you may
only save the life of your son by saving your own, and you can only
save your own by giving us the cheque we ask."

"Very well," replied Tarzan, for he knew that he could trust them to
carry out any sinister threat that Paulvitch had made, and there was a
bare chance that by conceding their demands he might save the boy.

That they would permit him to live after he had appended his name to
the cheque never occurred to him as being within the realms of
probability.  But he was determined to give them such a battle as they
would never forget, and possibly to take Paulvitch with him into
eternity.  He was only sorry that it was not Rokoff.

He took his pocket cheque-book and fountain-pen from his pocket.

"What is the amount?" he asked.

Paulvitch named an enormous sum.  Tarzan could scarce restrain a smile.

Their very cupidity was to prove the means of their undoing, in the
matter of the ransom at least.  Purposely he hesitated and haggled over
the amount, but Paulvitch was obdurate.   Finally the ape-man wrote out
his cheque for a larger sum than stood to his credit at the bank.

As he turned to hand the worthless slip of paper to the Russian his
glance chanced to pass across the starboard bow of the Kincaid.  To his
surprise he saw that the ship lay within a few hundred yards of land.
Almost down to the water's edge ran a dense tropical jungle, and behind
was higher land clothed in forest.

Paulvitch noted the direction of his gaze.

"You are to be set at liberty here," he said.

Tarzan's plan for immediate physical revenge upon the Russian vanished.
He thought the land before him the mainland of Africa, and he knew that
should they liberate him here he could doubtless find his way to
civilization with comparative ease.

Paulvitch took the cheque.

"Remove your clothing," he said to the ape-man.  "Here you will not
need it."

Tarzan demurred.

Paulvitch pointed to the armed sailors.  Then the Englishman slowly
divested himself of his clothing.

A boat was lowered, and, still heavily guarded, the ape-man was rowed
ashore.  Half an hour later the sailors had returned to the Kincaid,
and the steamer was slowly getting under way.

As Tarzan stood upon the narrow strip of beach watching the departure
of the vessel he saw a figure appear at the rail and call aloud to
attract his attention.

The ape-man had been about to read a note that one of the sailors had
handed him as the small boat that bore him to the shore was on the
point of returning to the steamer, but at the hail from the vessel's
deck he looked up.

He saw a black-bearded man who laughed at him in derision as he held
high above his head the figure of a little child.   Tarzan half started
as though to rush through the surf and strike out for the already
moving steamer; but realizing the futility of so rash an act he halted
at the water's edge.

Thus he stood, his gaze riveted upon the Kincaid until it disappeared
beyond a projecting promontory of the coast.

From the jungle at his back fierce bloodshot eyes glared from beneath
shaggy overhanging brows upon him.

Little monkeys in the tree-tops chattered and scolded, and from the
distance of the inland forest came the scream of a leopard.

But still John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, stood deaf and unseeing,
suffering the pangs of keen regret for the opportunity that he had
wasted because he had been so gullible as to place credence in a single
statement of the first lieutenant of his arch-enemy.

"I have at least," he thought, "one consolation--the knowledge that
Jane is safe in London.  Thank Heaven she, too, did not fall into the
clutches of those villains."

Behind him the hairy thing whose evil eyes had been watching him as a
cat watches a mouse was creeping stealthily toward him.

Where were the trained senses of the savage ape-man?

Where the acute hearing?

Where the uncanny sense of scent?




Chapter 3

Beasts at Bay


Slowly Tarzan unfolded the note the sailor had thrust into his hand,
and read it.  At first it made little impression on his sorrow-numbed
senses, but finally the full purport of the hideous plot of revenge
unfolded itself before his imagination.

"This will explain to you" [the note read] "the exact nature of my
intentions relative to your offspring and to you.

"You were born an ape.  You lived naked in the jungles--to your own we
have returned you; but your son shall rise a step above his sire.  It
is the immutable law of evolution.

"The father was a beast, but the son shall be a man--he shall take the
next ascending step in the scale of progress.   He shall be no naked
beast of the jungle, but shall wear a loin-cloth and copper anklets,
and, perchance, a ring in his nose, for he is to be reared by men--a
tribe of savage cannibals.

"I might have killed you, but that would have curtailed the full
measure of the punishment you have earned at my hands.

"Dead, you could not have suffered in the knowledge of your son's
plight; but living and in a place from which you may not escape to seek
or succour your child, you shall suffer worse than death for all the
years of your life in contemplation of the horrors of your son's
existence.

"This, then, is to be a part of your punishment for having dared to pit
yourself against

N. R.

"P.S.--The balance of your punishment has to do with what shall
presently befall your wife--that I shall leave to your imagination."


As he finished reading, a slight sound behind him brought him back with
a start to the world of present realities.

Instantly his senses awoke, and he was again Tarzan of the Apes.

As he wheeled about, it was a beast at bay, vibrant with the instinct
of self-preservation, that faced a huge bull-ape that was already
charging down upon him.

The two years that had elapsed since Tarzan had come out of the savage
forest with his rescued mate had witnessed slight diminution of the
mighty powers that had made him the invincible lord of the jungle.  His
great estates in Uziri had claimed much of his time and attention, and
there he had found ample field for the practical use and retention of
his almost superhuman powers; but naked and unarmed to do battle with
the shaggy, bull-necked beast that now confronted him was a test that
the ape-man would scarce have welcomed at any period of his wild
existence.

But there was no alternative other than to meet the rage-maddened
creature with the weapons with which nature had endowed him.

Over the bull's shoulder Tarzan could see now the heads and shoulders
of perhaps a dozen more of these mighty fore-runners of primitive man.

He knew, however, that there was little chance that they would attack
him, since it is not within the reasoning powers of the anthropoid to
be able to weigh or appreciate the value of concentrated action against
an enemy--otherwise they would long since have become the dominant
creatures of their haunts, so tremendous a power of destruction lies in
their mighty thews and savage fangs.

With a low snarl the beast now hurled himself at Tarzan, but the
ape-man had found, among other things in the haunts of civilized man,
certain methods of scientific warfare that are unknown to the jungle
folk.

Whereas, a few years since, he would have met the brute rush with brute
force, he now sidestepped his antagonist's headlong charge, and as the
brute hurtled past him swung a mighty right to the pit of the ape's
stomach.

With a howl of mingled rage and anguish the great anthropoid bent
double and sank to the ground, though almost instantly he was again
struggling to his feet.

Before he could regain them, however, his white-skinned foe had wheeled
and pounced upon him, and in the act there dropped from the shoulders
of the English lord the last shred of his superficial mantle of
civilization.

Once again he was the jungle beast revelling in bloody conflict with
his kind.  Once again he was Tarzan, son of Kala the she-ape.

His strong, white teeth sank into the hairy throat of his enemy as he
sought the pulsing jugular.

Powerful fingers held the mighty fangs from his own flesh, or clenched
and beat with the power of a steam-hammer upon the snarling,
foam-flecked face of his adversary.

In a circle about them the balance of the tribe of apes stood watching
and enjoying the struggle.  They muttered low gutturals of approval as
bits of white hide or hairy bloodstained skin were torn from one
contestant or the other.  But they were silent in amazement and
expectation when they saw the mighty white ape wriggle upon the back of
their king, and, with steel muscles tensed beneath the armpits of his
antagonist, bear down mightily with his open palms upon the back of the
thick bullneck, so that the king ape could but shriek in agony and
flounder helplessly about upon the thick mat of jungle grass.

As Tarzan had overcome the huge Terkoz that time years before when he
had been about to set out upon his quest for human beings of his own
kind and colour, so now he overcame this other great ape with the same
wrestling hold upon which he had stumbled by accident during that other
combat.   The little audience of fierce anthropoids heard the creaking
of their king's neck mingling with his agonized shrieks and hideous
roaring.

Then there came a sudden crack, like the breaking of a stout limb
before the fury of the wind.  The bullet-head crumpled forward upon its
flaccid neck against the great hairy chest--the roaring and the
shrieking ceased.

The little pig-eyes of the onlookers wandered from the still form of
their leader to that of the white ape that was rising to its feet
beside the vanquished, then back to their king as though in wonder that
he did not arise and slay this presumptuous stranger.

They saw the new-comer place a foot upon the neck of the quiet figure
at his feet and, throwing back his head, give vent to the wild, uncanny
challenge of the bull-ape that has made a kill.  Then they knew that
their king was dead.

Across the jungle rolled the horrid notes of the victory cry.  The
little monkeys in the tree-tops ceased their chattering.   The
harsh-voiced, brilliant-plumed birds were still.  From afar came the
answering wail of a leopard and the deep roar of a lion.

It was the old Tarzan who turned questioning eyes upon the little knot
of apes before him.  It was the old Tarzan who shook his head as though
to toss back a heavy mane that had fallen before his face--an old habit
dating from the days that his great shock of thick, black hair had
fallen about his shoulders, and often tumbled before his eyes when it
had meant life or death to him to have his vision unobstructed.

The ape-man knew that he might expect an immediate attack on the part
of that particular surviving bull-ape who felt himself best fitted to
contend for the kingship of the tribe.   Among his own apes he knew
that it was not unusual for an entire stranger to enter a community
and, after having dispatched the king, assume the leadership of the
tribe himself, together with the fallen monarch's mates.

On the other hand, if he made no attempt to follow them, they might
move slowly away from him, later to fight among themselves for the
supremacy.  That he could be king of them, if he so chose, he was
confident; but he was not sure he cared to assume the sometimes irksome
duties of that position, for he could see no particular advantage to be
gained thereby.

One of the younger apes, a huge, splendidly muscled brute, was edging
threateningly closer to the ape-man.  Through his bared fighting fangs
there issued a low, sullen growl.

Tarzan watched his every move, standing rigid as a statue.   To have
fallen back a step would have been to precipitate an immediate charge;
to have rushed forward to meet the other might have had the same
result, or it might have put the bellicose one to flight--it all
depended upon the young bull's stock of courage.

To stand perfectly still, waiting, was the middle course.   In this
event the bull would, according to custom, approach quite close to the
object of his attention, growling hideously and baring slavering fangs.
Slowly he would circle about the other, as though with a chip upon his
shoulder; and this he did, even as Tarzan had foreseen.

It might be a bluff royal, or, on the other hand, so unstable is the
mind of an ape, a passing impulse might hurl the hairy mass, tearing
and rending, upon the man without an instant's warning.

As the brute circled him Tarzan turned slowly, keeping his eyes ever
upon the eyes of his antagonist.  He had appraised the young bull as
one who had never quite felt equal to the task of overthrowing his
former king, but who one day would have done so.  Tarzan saw that the
beast was of wondrous proportions, standing over seven feet upon his
short, bowed legs.

His great, hairy arms reached almost to the ground even when he stood
erect, and his fighting fangs, now quite close to Tarzan's face, were
exceptionally long and sharp.  Like the others of his tribe, he
differed in several minor essentials from the apes of Tarzan's boyhood.

At first the ape-man had experienced a thrill of hope at sight of the
shaggy bodies of the anthropoids--a hope that by some strange freak of
fate he had been again returned to his own tribe; but a closer
inspection had convinced him that these were another species.

As the threatening bull continued his stiff and jerky circling of the
ape-man, much after the manner that you have noted among dogs when a
strange canine comes among them, it occurred to Tarzan to discover if
the language of his own tribe was identical with that of this other
family, and so he addressed the brute in the language of the tribe of
Kerchak.

"Who are you," he asked, "who threatens Tarzan of the Apes?"

The hairy brute looked his surprise.

"I am Akut," replied the other in the same simple, primal tongue which
is so low in the scale of spoken languages that, as Tarzan had
surmised, it was identical with that of the tribe in which the first
twenty years of his life had been spent.

"I am Akut," said the ape.  "Molak is dead.  I am king.  Go away or I
shall kill you!"

"You saw how easily I killed Molak," replied Tarzan.  "So I could kill
you if I cared to be king.  But Tarzan of the Apes would not be king of
the tribe of Akut.  All he wishes is to live in peace in this country.
Let us be friends.   Tarzan of the Apes can help you, and you can help
Tarzan of the Apes."

"You cannot kill Akut," replied the other.  "None is so great as Akut.
Had you not killed Molak, Akut would have done so, for Akut was ready
to be king."

For answer the ape-man hurled himself upon the great brute who during
the conversation had slightly relaxed his vigilance.

In the twinkling of an eye the man had seized the wrist of the great
ape, and before the other could grapple with him had whirled him about
and leaped upon his broad back.

Down they went together, but so well had Tarzan's plan worked out that
before ever they touched the ground he had gained the same hold upon
Akut that had broken Molak's neck.

Slowly he brought the pressure to bear, and then as in days gone by he
had given Kerchak the chance to surrender and live, so now he gave to
Akut--in whom he saw a possible ally of great strength and
resource--the option of living in amity with him or dying as he had
just seen his savage and heretofore invincible king die.

"Ka-Goda?" whispered Tarzan to the ape beneath him.

It was the same question that he had whispered to Kerchak, and in the
language of the apes it means, broadly, "Do you surrender?"

Akut thought of the creaking sound he had heard just before Molak's
thick neck had snapped, and he shuddered.

He hated to give up the kingship, though, so again he struggled to free
himself; but a sudden torturing pressure upon his vertebra brought an
agonized "ka-goda!" from his lips.

Tarzan relaxed his grip a trifle.

"You may still be king, Akut," he said.  "Tarzan told you that he did
not wish to be king.  If any question your right, Tarzan of the Apes
will help you in your battles."

The ape-man rose, and Akut came slowly to his feet.   Shaking his
bullet head and growling angrily, he waddled toward his tribe, looking
first at one and then at another of the larger bulls who might be
expected to challenge his leadership.

But none did so; instead, they drew away as he approached, and
presently the whole pack moved off into the jungle, and Tarzan was left
alone once more upon the beach.

The ape-man was sore from the wounds that Molak had inflicted upon him,
but he was inured to physical suffering and endured it with the calm
and fortitude of the wild beasts that had taught him to lead the jungle
life after the manner of all those that are born to it.

His first need, he realized, was for weapons of offence and defence,
for his encounter with the apes, and the distant notes of the savage
voices of Numa the lion, and Sheeta, the panther, warned him that his
was to be no life of indolent ease and security.

It was but a return to the old existence of constant bloodshed and
danger--to the hunting and the being hunted.  Grim beasts would stalk
him, as they had stalked him in the past, and never would there be a
moment, by savage day or by cruel night, that he might not have instant
need of such crude weapons as he could fashion from the materials at
hand.

Upon the shore he found an out-cropping of brittle, igneous rock.  By
dint of much labour he managed to chip off a narrow sliver some twelve
inches long by a quarter of an inch thick.  One edge was quite thin for
a few inches near the tip.  It was the rudiment of a knife.

With it he went into the jungle, searching until he found a fallen tree
of a certain species of hardwood with which he was familiar.  From this
he cut a small straight branch, which he pointed at one end.

Then he scooped a small, round hole in the surface of the prostrate
trunk.  Into this he crumbled a few bits of dry bark, minutely
shredded, after which he inserted the tip of his pointed stick, and,
sitting astride the bole of the tree, spun the slender rod rapidly
between his palms.

After a time a thin smoke rose from the little mass of tinder, and a
moment later the whole broke into flame.   Heaping some larger twigs
and sticks upon the tiny fire, Tarzan soon had quite a respectable
blaze roaring in the enlarging cavity of the dead tree.

Into this he thrust the blade of his stone knife, and as it became
superheated he would withdraw it, touching a spot near the thin edge
with a drop of moisture.  Beneath the wetted area a little flake of the
glassy material would crack and scale away.

Thus, very slowly, the ape-man commenced the tedious operation of
putting a thin edge upon his primitive hunting-knife.

He did not attempt to accomplish the feat all in one sitting.  At first
he was content to achieve a cutting edge of a couple of inches, with
which he cut a long, pliable bow, a handle for his knife, a stout
cudgel, and a goodly supply of arrows.

These he cached in a tall tree beside a little stream, and here also he
constructed a platform with a roof of palm-leaves above it.

When all these things had been finished it was growing dusk, and Tarzan
felt a strong desire to eat.

He had noted during the brief incursion he had made into the forest
that a short distance up-stream from his tree there was a much-used
watering place, where, from the trampled mud of either bank, it was
evident beasts of all sorts and in great numbers came to drink.  To
this spot the hungry ape-man made his silent way.

Through the upper terrace of the tree-tops he swung with the grace and
ease of a monkey.  But for the heavy burden upon his heart he would
have been happy in this return to the old free life of his boyhood.

Yet even with that burden he fell into the little habits and manners of
his early life that were in reality more a part of him than the thin
veneer of civilization that the past three years of his association
with the white men of the outer world had spread lightly over him--a
veneer that only hid the crudities of the beast that Tarzan of the Apes
had been.

Could his fellow-peers of the House of Lords have seen him then they
would have held up their noble hands in holy horror.

Silently he crouched in the lower branches of a great forest giant that
overhung the trail, his keen eyes and sensitive ears strained into the
distant jungle, from which he knew his dinner would presently emerge.

Nor had he long to wait.

Scarce had he settled himself to a comfortable position, his lithe,
muscular legs drawn well up beneath him as the panther draws his
hindquarters in preparation for the spring, than Bara, the deer, came
daintily down to drink.

But more than Bara was coming.  Behind the graceful buck came another
which the deer could neither see nor scent, but whose movements were
apparent to Tarzan of the Apes because of the elevated position of the
ape-man's ambush.

He knew not yet exactly the nature of the thing that moved so
stealthily through the jungle a few hundred yards behind the deer; but
he was convinced that it was some great beast of prey stalking Bara for
the selfsame purpose as that which prompted him to await the fleet
animal.  Numa, perhaps, or Sheeta, the panther.

In any event, Tarzan could see his repast slipping from his grasp
unless Bara moved more rapidly toward the ford than at present.

Even as these thoughts passed through his mind some noise of the
stalker in his rear must have come to the buck, for with a sudden start
he paused for an instant, trembling, in his tracks, and then with a
swift bound dashed straight for the river and Tarzan.  It was his
intention to flee through the shallow ford and escape upon the opposite
side of the river.

Not a hundred yards behind him came Numa.

Tarzan could see him quite plainly now.  Below the ape-man Bara was
about to pass.  Could he do it?  But even as he asked himself the
question the hungry man launched himself from his perch full upon the
back of the startled buck.

In another instant Numa would be upon them both, so if the ape-man were
to dine that night, or ever again, he must act quickly.

Scarcely had he touched the sleek hide of the deer with a momentum that
sent the animal to its knees than he had grasped a horn in either hand,
and with a single quick wrench twisted the animal's neck completely
round, until he felt the vertebrae snap beneath his grip.

The lion was roaring in rage close behind him as he swung the deer
across his shoulder, and, grasping a foreleg between his strong teeth,
leaped for the nearest of the lower branches that swung above his head.

With both hands he grasped the limb, and, at the instant that Numa
sprang, drew himself and his prey out of reach of the animal's cruel
talons.

There was a thud below him as the baffled cat fell back to earth, and
then Tarzan of the Apes, drawing his dinner farther up to the safety of
a higher limb, looked down with grinning face into the gleaming yellow
eyes of the other wild beast that glared up at him from beneath, and
with taunting insults flaunted the tender carcass of his kill in the
face of him whom he had cheated of it.

With his crude stone knife he cut a juicy steak from the hindquarters,
and while the great lion paced, growling, back and forth below him,
Lord Greystoke filled his savage belly, nor ever in the choicest of his
exclusive London clubs had a meal tasted more palatable.

The warm blood of his kill smeared his hands and face and filled his
nostrils with the scent that the savage carnivora love best.

And when he had finished he left the balance of the carcass in a high
fork of the tree where he had dined, and with Numa trailing below him,
still keen for revenge, he made his way back to his tree-top shelter,
where he slept until the sun was high the following morning.




Chapter 4

Sheeta


The next few days were occupied by Tarzan in completing his weapons and
exploring the jungle.  He strung his bow with tendons from the buck
upon which he had dined his first evening upon the new shore, and
though he would have preferred the gut of Sheeta for the purpose, he
was content to wait until opportunity permitted him to kill one of the
great cats.

He also braided a long grass rope--such a rope as he had used so many
years before to tantalize the ill-natured Tublat, and which later had
developed into a wondrous effective weapon in the practised hands of
the little ape-boy.

A sheath and handle for his hunting-knife he fashioned, and a quiver
for arrows, and from the hide of Bara a belt and loin-cloth.  Then he
set out to learn something of the strange land in which he found
himself.  That it was not his old familiar west coast of the African
continent he knew from the fact that it faced east--the rising sun came
up out of the sea before the threshold of the jungle.

But that it was not the east coast of Africa he was equally positive,
for he felt satisfied that the Kincaid had not passed through the
Mediterranean, the Suez Canal, and the Red Sea, nor had she had time to
round the Cape of Good Hope.  So he was quite at a loss to know where
he might be.

Sometimes he wondered if the ship had crossed the broad Atlantic to
deposit him upon some wild South American shore; but the presence of
Numa, the lion, decided him that such could not be the case.

As Tarzan made his lonely way through the jungle paralleling the shore,
he felt strong upon him a desire for companionship, so that gradually
he commenced to regret that he had not cast his lot with the apes.  He
had seen nothing of them since that first day, when the influences of
civilization were still paramount within him.

Now he was more nearly returned to the Tarzan of old, and though he
appreciated the fact that there could be little in common between
himself and the great anthropoids, still they were better than no
company at all.

Moving leisurely, sometimes upon the ground and again among the lower
branches of the trees, gathering an occasional fruit or turning over a
fallen log in search of the larger bugs, which he still found as
palatable as of old, Tarzan had covered a mile or more when his
attention was attracted by the scent of Sheeta up-wind ahead of him.

Now Sheeta, the panther, was one whom Tarzan was exceptionally glad
to fall in with, for he had it in mind not only to utilize the great
cat's strong gut for his bow, but also to fashion a new quiver and
loin-cloth from pieces of his hide.   So, whereas the ape-man had gone
carelessly before, he now became the personification of noiseless
stealth.

Swiftly and silently he glided through the forest in the wake of the
savage cat, nor was the pursuer, for all his noble birth, one whit less
savage than the wild, fierce thing he stalked.

As he came closer to Sheeta he became aware that the panther on his
part was stalking game of his own, and even as he realized this fact
there came to his nostrils, wafted from his right by a vagrant breeze,
the strong odour of a company of great apes.

The panther had taken to a large tree as Tarzan came within sight of
him, and beyond and below him Tarzan saw the tribe of Akut lolling in a
little, natural clearing.  Some of them were dozing against the boles
of trees, while others roamed about turning over bits of bark from
beneath which they transferred the luscious grubs and beetles to their
mouths.

Akut was the closest to Sheeta.

The great cat lay crouched upon a thick limb, hidden from the ape's
view by dense foliage, waiting patiently until the anthropoid should
come within range of his spring.

Tarzan cautiously gained a position in the same tree with the panther
and a little above him.  In his left hand he grasped his slim stone
blade.  He would have preferred to use his noose, but the foliage
surrounding the huge cat precluded the possibility of an accurate throw
with the rope.

Akut had now wandered quite close beneath the tree wherein lay the
waiting death.  Sheeta slowly edged his hind paws along the branch
still further beneath him, and then with a hideous shriek he launched
himself toward the great ape.   The barest fraction of a second before
his spring another beast of prey above him leaped, its weird and savage
cry mingling with his.

As the startled Akut looked up he saw the panther almost above him, and
already upon the panther's back the white ape that had bested him that
day near the great water.

The teeth of the ape-man were buried in the back of Sheeta's neck and
his right arm was round the fierce throat, while the left hand,
grasping a slender piece of stone, rose and fell in mighty blows upon
the panther's side behind the left shoulder.

Akut had just time to leap to one side to avoid being pinioned beneath
these battling monsters of the jungle.

With a crash they came to earth at his feet.  Sheeta was screaming,
snarling, and roaring horribly; but the white ape clung tenaciously and
in silence to the thrashing body of his quarry.

Steadily and remorselessly the stone knife was driven home through the
glossy hide--time and again it drank deep, until with a final agonized
lunge and shriek the great feline rolled over upon its side and, save
for the spasmodic jerking of its muscles, lay quiet and still in death.

Then the ape-man raised his head, as he stood over the carcass of his
kill, and once again through the jungle rang his wild and savage
victory challenge.

Akut and the apes of Akut stood looking in startled wonder at the dead
body of Sheeta and the lithe, straight figure of the man who had slain
him.

Tarzan was the first to speak.

He had saved Akut's life for a purpose, and, knowing the limitations of
the ape intellect, he also knew that he must make this purpose plain to
the anthropoid if it were to serve him in the way he hoped.

"I am Tarzan of the Apes," he said, "Mighty hunter.  Mighty fighter.
By the great water I spared Akut's life when I might have taken it and
become king of the tribe of Akut.  Now I have saved Akut from death
beneath the rending fangs of Sheeta.

"When Akut or the tribe of Akut is in danger, let them call to Tarzan
thus"--and the ape-man raised the hideous cry with which the tribe of
Kerchak had been wont to summon its absent members in times of peril.

"And," he continued, "when they hear Tarzan call to them, let them
remember what he has done for Akut and come to him with great speed.
Shall it be as Tarzan says?"

"Huh!" assented Akut, and from the members of his tribe there rose a
unanimous "Huh."

Then, presently, they went to feeding again as though nothing had
happened, and with them fed John Clayton, Lord Greystoke.

He noticed, however, that Akut kept always close to him, and was often
looking at him with a strange wonder in his little bloodshot eyes, and
once he did a thing that Tarzan during all his long years among the
apes had never before seen an ape do--he found a particularly tender
morsel and handed it to Tarzan.

As the tribe hunted, the glistening body of the ape-man mingled with
the brown, shaggy hides of his companions.   Oftentimes they brushed
together in passing, but the apes had already taken his presence for
granted, so that he was as much one of them as Akut himself.

If he came too close to a she with a young baby, the former would bare
her great fighting fangs and growl ominously, and occasionally a
truculent young bull would snarl a warning if Tarzan approached while
the former was eating.  But in those things the treatment was no
different from that which they accorded any other member of the tribe.

Tarzan on his part felt very much at home with these fierce, hairy
progenitors of primitive man.  He skipped nimbly out of reach of each
threatening female--for such is the way of apes, if they be not in one
of their occasional fits of bestial rage--and he growled back at the
truculent young bulls, baring his canine teeth even as they.  Thus
easily he fell back into the way of his early life, nor did it seem
that he had ever tasted association with creatures of his own kind.

For the better part of a week he roamed the jungle with his new
friends, partly because of a desire for companionship and partially
through a well-laid plan to impress himself indelibly upon their
memories, which at best are none too long; for Tarzan from past
experience knew that it might serve him in good stead to have a tribe
of these powerful and terrible beasts at his call.

When he was convinced that he had succeeded to some extent in fixing
his identity upon them he decided to again take up his exploration.  To
this end he set out toward the north early one day, and, keeping
parallel with the shore, travelled rapidly until almost nightfall.

When the sun rose the next morning he saw that it lay almost directly
to his right as he stood upon the beach instead of straight out across
the water as heretofore, and so he reasoned that the shore line had
trended toward the west.   All the second day he continued his rapid
course, and when Tarzan of the Apes sought speed, he passed through the
middle terrace of the forest with the rapidity of a squirrel.

That night the sun set straight out across the water opposite the land,
and then the ape-man guessed at last the truth that he had been
suspecting.

Rokoff had set him ashore upon an island.

He might have known it!  If there was any plan that would render his
position more harrowing he should have known that such would be the one
adopted by the Russian, and what could be more terrible than to leave
him to a lifetime of suspense upon an uninhabited island?

Rokoff doubtless had sailed directly to the mainland, where it would be
a comparatively easy thing for him to find the means of delivering the
infant Jack into the hands of the cruel and savage foster-parents, who,
as his note had threatened, would have the upbringing of the child.

Tarzan shuddered as he thought of the cruel suffering the little one
must endure in such a life, even though he might fall into the hands of
individuals whose intentions toward him were of the kindest.  The
ape-man had had sufficient experience with the lower savages of Africa
to know that even there may be found the cruder virtues of charity and
humanity; but their lives were at best but a series of terrible
privations, dangers, and sufferings.

Then there was the horrid after-fate that awaited the child as he grew
to manhood.  The horrible practices that would form a part of his
life-training would alone be sufficient to bar him forever from
association with those of his own race and station in life.

A cannibal!  His little boy a savage man-eater!  It was too horrible to
contemplate.

The filed teeth, the slit nose, the little face painted hideously.
Tarzan groaned.  Could he but feel the throat of the Russ fiend beneath
his steel fingers!

And Jane!

What tortures of doubt and fear and uncertainty she must be suffering.
He felt that his position was infinitely less terrible than hers, for
he at least knew that one of his loved ones was safe at home, while she
had no idea of the whereabouts of either her husband or her son.

It is well for Tarzan that he did not guess the truth, for the
knowledge would have but added a hundredfold to his suffering.

As he moved slowly through the jungle his mind absorbed by his gloomy
thoughts, there presently came to his ears a strange scratching sound
which he could not translate.

Cautiously he moved in the direction from which it emanated, presently
coming upon a huge panther pinned beneath a fallen tree.

As Tarzan approached, the beast turned, snarling, toward him,
struggling to extricate itself; but one great limb across its back and
the smaller entangling branches pinioning its legs prevented it from
moving but a few inches in any direction.

The ape-man stood before the helpless cat fitting an arrow to his bow
that he might dispatch the beast that otherwise must die of starvation;
but even as he drew back the shaft a sudden whim stayed his hand.

Why rob the poor creature of life and liberty, when it would be so easy
a thing to restore both to it!  He was sure from the fact that the
panther moved all its limbs in its futile struggle for freedom that its
spine was uninjured, and for the same reason he knew that none of its
limbs were broken.

Relaxing his bowstring, he returned the arrow to the quiver and,
throwing the bow about his shoulder, stepped closer to the pinioned
beast.

On his lips was the soothing, purring sound that the great cats
themselves made when contented and happy.  It was the nearest approach
to a friendly advance that Tarzan could make in the language of Sheeta.

The panther ceased his snarling and eyed the ape-man closely.   To lift
the tree's great weight from the animal it was necessary to come within
reach of those long, strong talons, and when the tree had been removed
the man would be totally at the mercy of the savage beast; but to
Tarzan of the Apes fear was a thing unknown.

Having decided, he acted promptly.

Unhesitatingly, he stepped into the tangle of branches close to the
panther's side, still voicing his friendly and conciliatory purr.  The
cat turned his head toward the man, eyeing him steadily--questioningly.
The long fangs were bared, but more in preparedness than threat.

Tarzan put a broad shoulder beneath the bole of the tree, and as he did
so his bare leg pressed against the cat's silken side, so close was the
man to the great beast.

Slowly Tarzan extended his giant thews.

The great tree with its entangling branches rose gradually from the
panther, who, feeling the encumbering weight diminish, quickly crawled
from beneath.  Tarzan let the tree fall back to earth, and the two
beasts turned to look upon one another.

A grim smile lay upon the ape-man's lips, for he knew that he had taken
his life in his hands to free this savage jungle fellow; nor would it
have surprised him had the cat sprung upon him the instant that it had
been released.

But it did not do so.  Instead, it stood a few paces from the tree
watching the ape-man clamber out of the maze of fallen branches.

Once outside, Tarzan was not three paces from the panther.   He might
have taken to the higher branches of the trees upon the opposite side,
for Sheeta cannot climb to the heights to which the ape-man can go; but
something, a spirit of bravado perhaps, prompted him to approach the
panther as though to discover if any feeling of gratitude would prompt
the beast to friendliness.

As he approached the mighty cat the creature stepped warily to one
side, and the ape-man brushed past him within a foot of the dripping
jaws, and as he continued on through the forest the panther followed on
behind him, as a hound follows at heel.

For a long time Tarzan could not tell whether the beast was following
out of friendly feelings or merely stalking him against the time he
should be hungry; but finally he was forced to believe that the former
incentive it was that prompted the animal's action.

Later in the day the scent of a deer sent Tarzan into the trees, and
when he had dropped his noose about the animal's neck he called to
Sheeta, using a purr similar to that which he had utilized to pacify
the brute's suspicions earlier in the day, but a trifle louder and more
shrill.

It was similar to that which he had heard panthers use after a kill
when they had been hunting in pairs.

Almost immediately there was a crashing of the underbrush close at
hand, and the long, lithe body of his strange companion broke into view.

At sight of the body of Bara and the smell of blood the panther gave
forth a shrill scream, and a moment later two beasts were feeding side
by side upon the tender meat of the deer.

For several days this strangely assorted pair roamed the jungle
together.

When one made a kill he called the other, and thus they fed well and
often.

On one occasion as they were dining upon the carcass of a boar that
Sheeta had dispatched, Numa, the lion, grim and terrible, broke through
the tangled grasses close beside them.

With an angry, warning roar he sprang forward to chase them from their
kill.  Sheeta bounded into a near-by thicket, while Tarzan took to the
low branches of an overhanging tree.

Here the ape-man unloosed his grass rope from about his neck, and as
Numa stood above the body of the boar, challenging head erect, he
dropped the sinuous noose about the maned neck, drawing the stout
strands taut with a sudden jerk.   At the same time he called shrilly
to Sheeta, as he drew the struggling lion upward until only his hind
feet touched the ground.

Quickly he made the rope fast to a stout branch, and as the panther, in
answer to his summons, leaped into sight, Tarzan dropped to the earth
beside the struggling and infuriated Numa, and with a long sharp knife
sprang upon him at one side even as Sheeta did upon the other.

The panther tore and rent Numa upon the right, while the ape-man struck
home with his stone knife upon the other, so that before the mighty
clawing of the king of beasts had succeeded in parting the rope he hung
quite dead and harmless in the noose.

And then upon the jungle air there rose in unison from two savage
throats the victory cry of the bull-ape and the panther, blended into
one frightful and uncanny scream.

As the last notes died away in a long-drawn, fearsome wail, a score of
painted warriors, drawing their long war-canoe upon the beach, halted
to stare in the direction of the jungle and to listen.




Chapter 5

Mugambi


By the time that Tarzan had travelled entirely about the coast of the
island, and made several trips inland from various points, he was sure
that he was the only human being upon it.

Nowhere had he found any sign that men had stopped even temporarily
upon this shore, though, of course, he knew that so quickly does the
rank vegetation of the tropics erase all but the most permanent of
human monuments that he might be in error in his deductions.

The day following the killing of Numa, Tarzan and Sheeta came upon the
tribe of Akut.  At sight of the panther the great apes took to flight,
but after a time Tarzan succeeded in recalling them.

It had occurred to him that it would be at least an interesting
experiment to attempt to reconcile these hereditary enemies.  He
welcomed anything that would occupy his time and his mind beyond the
filling of his belly and the gloomy thoughts to which he fell prey the
moment that he became idle.

To communicate his plan to the apes was not a particularly difficult
matter, though their narrow and limited vocabulary was strained in the
effort; but to impress upon the little, wicked brain of Sheeta that he
was to hunt with and not for his legitimate prey proved a task almost
beyond the powers of the ape-man.

Tarzan, among his other weapons, possessed a long, stout cudgel, and
after fastening his rope about the panther's neck he used this
instrument freely upon the snarling beast, endeavouring in this way to
impress upon its memory that it must not attack the great, shaggy
manlike creatures that had approached more closely once they had seen
the purpose of the rope about Sheeta's neck.

That the cat did not turn and rend Tarzan is something of a miracle
which may possibly be accounted for by the fact that twice when it
turned growling upon the ape-man he had rapped it sharply upon its
sensitive nose, inculcating in its mind thereby a most wholesome fear
of the cudgel and the ape-beasts behind it.

It is a question if the original cause of his attachment for Tarzan was
still at all clear in the mind of the panther, though doubtless some
subconscious suggestion, superinduced by this primary reason and aided
and abetted by the habit of the past few days, did much to compel the
beast to tolerate treatment at his hands that would have sent it at the
throat of any other creature.

Then, too, there was the compelling force of the manmind exerting its
powerful influence over this creature of a lower order, and, after all,
it may have been this that proved the most potent factor in Tarzan's
supremacy over Sheeta and the other beasts of the jungle that had from
time to time fallen under his domination.

Be that as it may, for days the man, the panther, and the great apes
roamed their savage haunts side by side, making their kills together
and sharing them with one another, and of all the fierce and savage
band none was more terrible than the smooth-skinned, powerful beast
that had been but a few short months before a familiar figure in many a
London drawing room.

Sometimes the beasts separated to follow their own inclinations for an
hour or a day, and it was upon one of these occasions when the ape-man
had wandered through the tree-tops toward the beach, and was stretched
in the hot sun upon the sand, that from the low summit of a near-by
promontory a pair of keen eyes discovered him.

For a moment the owner of the eyes looked in astonishment at the figure
of the savage white man basking in the rays of that hot, tropic sun;
then he turned, making a sign to some one behind him.  Presently
another pair of eyes were looking down upon the ape-man, and then
another and another, until a full score of hideously trapped, savage
warriors were lying upon their bellies along the crest of the ridge
watching the white-skinned stranger.

They were down wind from Tarzan, and so their scent was not carried to
him, and as his back was turned half toward them he did not see their
cautious advance over the edge of the promontory and down through the
rank grass toward the sandy beach where he lay.

Big fellows they were, all of them, their barbaric headdresses and
grotesquely painted faces, together with their many metal ornaments and
gorgeously coloured feathers, adding to their wild, fierce appearance.

Once at the foot of the ridge, they came cautiously to their feet, and,
bent half-double, advanced silently upon the unconscious white man,
their heavy war-clubs swinging menacingly in their brawny hands.

The mental suffering that Tarzan's sorrowful thoughts induced had the
effect of numbing his keen, perceptive faculties, so that the advancing
savages were almost upon him before he became aware that he was no
longer alone upon the beach.

So quickly, though, were his mind and muscles wont to react in unison
to the slightest alarm that he was upon his feet and facing his
enemies, even as he realized that something was behind him.  As he
sprang to his feet the warriors leaped toward him with raised clubs and
savage yells, but the foremost went down to sudden death beneath the
long, stout stick of the ape-man, and then the lithe, sinewy figure was
among them, striking right and left with a fury, power, and precision
that brought panic to the ranks of the blacks.

For a moment they withdrew, those that were left of them, and consulted
together at a short distance from the ape-man, who stood with folded
arms, a half-smile upon his handsome face, watching them.  Presently
they advanced upon him once more, this time wielding their heavy
war-spears.  They were between Tarzan and the jungle, in a little
semicircle that closed in upon him as they advanced.

There seemed to the ape-man but slight chance to escape the final
charge when all the great spears should be hurled simultaneously at
him; but if he had desired to escape there was no way other than
through the ranks of the savages except the open sea behind him.

His predicament was indeed most serious when an idea occurred to him
that altered his smile to a broad grin.   The warriors were still some
little distance away, advancing slowly, making, after the manner of
their kind, a frightful din with their savage yells and the pounding of
their naked feet upon the ground as they leaped up and down in a
fantastic war dance.

Then it was that the ape-man lifted his voice in a series of wild,
weird screams that brought the blacks to a sudden, perplexed halt.
They looked at one another questioningly, for here was a sound so
hideous that their own frightful din faded into insignificance beside
it.  No human throat could have formed those bestial notes, they were
sure, and yet with their own eyes they had seen this white man open his
mouth to pour forth his awful cry.

But only for a moment they hesitated, and then with one accord they
again took up their fantastic advance upon their prey; but even then a
sudden crashing in the jungle behind them brought them once more to a
halt, and as they turned to look in the direction of this new noise
there broke upon their startled visions a sight that may well have
frozen the blood of braver men than the Wagambi.

Leaping from the tangled vegetation of the jungle's rim came a huge
panther, with blazing eyes and bared fangs, and in his wake a score of
mighty, shaggy apes lumbering rapidly toward them, half erect upon
their short, bowed legs, and with their long arms reaching to the
ground, where their horny knuckles bore the weight of their ponderous
bodies as they lurched from side to side in their grotesque advance.

The beasts of Tarzan had come in answer to his call.

Before the Wagambi could recover from their astonishment the frightful
horde was upon them from one side and Tarzan of the Apes from the
other.  Heavy spears were hurled and mighty war-clubs wielded, and
though apes went down never to rise, so, too, went down the men of
Ugambi.

Sheeta's cruel fangs and tearing talons ripped and tore at the black
hides.  Akut's mighty yellow tusks found the jugular of more than one
sleek-skinned savage, and Tarzan of the Apes was here and there and
everywhere, urging on his fierce allies and taking a heavy toll with
his long, slim knife.

In a moment the blacks had scattered for their lives, but of the score
that had crept down the grassy sides of the promontory only a single
warrior managed to escape the horde that had overwhelmed his people.

This one was Mugambi, chief of the Wagambi of Ugambi, and as he
disappeared in the tangled luxuriousness of the rank growth upon the
ridge's summit only the keen eyes of the ape-man saw the direction of
his flight.

Leaving his pack to eat their fill upon the flesh of their
victims--flesh that he could not touch--Tarzan of the Apes pursued the
single survivor of the bloody fray.  Just beyond the ridge he came
within sight of the fleeing black, making with headlong leaps for a
long war-canoe that was drawn well up upon the beach above the high
tide surf.

Noiseless as the fellow's shadow, the ape-man raced after the
terror-stricken black.  In the white man's mind was a new plan,
awakened by sight of the war-canoe.  If these men had come to his
island from another, or from the mainland, why not utilize their craft
to make his way to the country from which they had come?  Evidently it
was an inhabited country, and no doubt had occasional intercourse with
the mainland, if it were not itself upon the continent of Africa.

A heavy hand fell upon the shoulder of the escaping Mugambi before he
was aware that he was being pursued, and as he turned to do battle with
his assailant giant fingers closed about his wrists and he was hurled
to earth with a giant astride him before he could strike a blow in his
own defence.

In the language of the West Coast, Tarzan spoke to the prostrate man
beneath him.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"Mugambi, chief of the Wagambi," replied the black.

"I will spare your life," said Tarzan, "if you will promise to help me
to leave this island.  What do you answer?"

"I will help you," replied Mugambi.  "But now that you have killed all
my warriors, I do not know that even I can leave your country, for
there will be none to wield the paddles, and without paddlers we cannot
cross the water."

Tarzan rose and allowed his prisoner to come to his feet.   The fellow
was a magnificent specimen of manhood--a black counterpart in physique
of the splendid white man whom he faced.

"Come!" said the ape-man, and started back in the direction from which
they could hear the snarling and growling of the feasting pack.
Mugambi drew back.

"They will kill us," he said.

"I think not," replied Tarzan.  "They are mine."

Still the black hesitated, fearful of the consequences of approaching
the terrible creatures that were dining upon the bodies of his
warriors; but Tarzan forced him to accompany him, and presently the two
emerged from the jungle in full view of the grisly spectacle upon the
beach.  At sight of the men the beasts looked up with menacing growls,
but Tarzan strode in among them, dragging the trembling Wagambi with
him.

As he had taught the apes to accept Sheeta, so he taught them to adopt
Mugambi as well, and much more easily; but Sheeta seemed quite unable
to understand that though he had been called upon to devour Mugambi's
warriors he was not to be allowed to proceed after the same fashion
with Mugambi.   However, being well filled, he contented himself with
walking round the terror-stricken savage, emitting low, menacing growls
the while he kept his flaming, baleful eyes riveted upon the black.

Mugambi, on his part, clung closely to Tarzan, so that the ape-man
could scarce control his laughter at the pitiable condition to which
the chief's fear had reduced him; but at length the white took the
great cat by the scruff of the neck and, dragging it quite close to the
Wagambi, slapped it sharply upon the nose each time that it growled at
the stranger.

At the sight of the thing--a man mauling with his bare hands one of the
most relentless and fierce of the jungle carnivora--Mugambi's eyes
bulged from their sockets, and from entertaining a sullen respect for
the giant white man who had made him prisoner, the black felt an almost
worshipping awe of Tarzan.

The education of Sheeta progressed so well that in a short time Mugambi
ceased to be the object of his hungry attention, and the black felt a
degree more of safety in his society.

To say that Mugambi was entirely happy or at ease in his new
environment would not be to adhere strictly to the truth.  His eyes
were constantly rolling apprehensively from side to side as now one and
now another of the fierce pack chanced to wander near him, so that for
the most of the time it was principally the whites that showed.

Together Tarzan and Mugambi, with Sheeta and Akut, lay in wait at the
ford for a deer, and when at a word from the ape-man the four of them
leaped out upon the affrighted animal the black was sure that the poor
creature died of fright before ever one of the great beasts touched it.

Mugambi built a fire and cooked his portion of the kill; but Tarzan,
Sheeta, and Akut tore theirs, raw, with their sharp teeth, growling
among themselves when one ventured to encroach upon the share of
another.

It was not, after all, strange that the white man's ways should have
been so much more nearly related to those of the beasts than were the
savage blacks.  We are, all of us, creatures of habit, and when the
seeming necessity for schooling ourselves in new ways ceases to exist,
we fall naturally and easily into the manners and customs which long
usage has implanted ineradicably within us.

Mugambi from childhood had eaten no meat until it had been cooked,
while Tarzan, on the other hand, had never tasted cooked food of any
sort until he had grown almost to manhood, and only within the past
three or four years had he eaten cooked meat.  Not only did the habit
of a lifetime prompt him to eat it raw, but the craving of his palate
as well; for to him cooked flesh was spoiled flesh when compared with
the rich and juicy meat of a fresh, hot kill.

That he could, with relish, eat raw meat that had been buried by
himself weeks before, and enjoy small rodents and disgusting grubs,
seems to us who have been always "civilized" a revolting fact; but had
we learned in childhood to eat these things, and had we seen all those
about us eat them, they would seem no more sickening to us now than do
many of our greatest dainties, at which a savage African cannibal would
look with repugnance and turn up his nose.

For instance, there is a tribe in the vicinity of Lake Rudolph that
will eat no sheep or cattle, though its next neighbors do so.  Near by
is another tribe that eats donkey-meat--a custom most revolting to the
surrounding tribes that do not eat donkey.  So who may say that it is
nice to eat snails and frogs' legs and oysters, but disgusting to feed
upon grubs and beetles, or that a raw oyster, hoof, horns, and tail, is
less revolting than the sweet, clean meat of a fresh-killed buck?

The next few days Tarzan devoted to the weaving of a barkcloth sail
with which to equip the canoe, for he despaired of being able to teach
the apes to wield the paddles, though he did manage to get several of
them to embark in the frail craft which he and Mugambi paddled about
inside the reef where the water was quite smooth.

During these trips he had placed paddles in their hands, when they
attempted to imitate the movements of him and Mugambi, but so difficult
is it for them long to concentrate upon a thing that he soon saw that
it would require weeks of patient training before they would be able to
make any effective use of these new implements, if, in fact, they
should ever do so.

There was one exception, however, and he was Akut.  Almost from the
first he showed an interest in this new sport that revealed a much
higher plane of intelligence than that attained by any of his tribe.
He seemed to grasp the purpose of the paddles, and when Tarzan saw that
this was so he took much pains to explain in the meagre language of the
anthropoid how they might be used to the best advantage.

From Mugambi Tarzan learned that the mainland lay but a short distance
from the island.  It seemed that the Wagambi warriors had ventured too
far out in their frail craft, and when caught by a heavy tide and a
high wind from off-shore they had been driven out of sight of land.
After paddling for a whole night, thinking that they were headed for
home, they had seen this land at sunrise, and, still taking it for the
mainland, had hailed it with joy, nor had Mugambi been aware that it
was an island until Tarzan had told him that this was the fact.

The Wagambi chief was quite dubious as to the sail, for he had never
seen such a contrivance used.  His country lay far up the broad Ugambi
River, and this was the first occasion that any of his people had found
their way to the ocean.

Tarzan, however, was confident that with a good west wind he could
navigate the little craft to the mainland.  At any rate, he decided, it
would be preferable to perish on the way than to remain indefinitely
upon this evidently uncharted island to which no ships might ever be
expected to come.

And so it was that when the first fair wind rose he embarked upon his
cruise, and with him he took as strange and fearsome a crew as ever
sailed under a savage master.

Mugambi and Akut went with him, and Sheeta, the panther, and a dozen
great males of the tribe of Akut.




Chapter 6

A Hideous Crew


The war-canoe with its savage load moved slowly toward the break in the
reef through which it must pass to gain the open sea.  Tarzan, Mugambi,
and Akut wielded the paddles, for the shore kept the west wind from the
little sail.

Sheeta crouched in the bow at the ape-man's feet, for it had seemed
best to Tarzan always to keep the wicked beast as far from the other
members of the party as possible, since it would require little or no
provocation to send him at the throat of any than the white man, whom
he evidently now looked upon as his master.

In the stern was Mugambi, and just in front of him squatted Akut, while
between Akut and Tarzan the twelve hairy apes sat upon their haunches,
blinking dubiously this way and that, and now and then turning their
eyes longingly back toward shore.

All went well until the canoe had passed beyond the reef.   Here the
breeze struck the sail, sending the rude craft lunging among the waves
that ran higher and higher as they drew away from the shore.

With the tossing of the boat the apes became panic-stricken.  They
first moved uneasily about, and then commenced grumbling and whining.
With difficulty Akut kept them in hand for a time; but when a
particularly large wave struck the dugout simultaneously with a little
squall of wind their terror broke all bounds, and, leaping to their
feet, they all but overturned the boat before Akut and Tarzan together
could quiet them.  At last calm was restored, and eventually the apes
became accustomed to the strange antics of their craft, after which no
more trouble was experienced with them.

The trip was uneventful, the wind held, and after ten hours' steady
sailing the black shadows of the coast loomed close before the
straining eyes of the ape-man in the bow.  It was far too dark to
distinguish whether they had approached close to the mouth of the
Ugambi or not, so Tarzan ran in through the surf at the closest point
to await the dawn.

The dugout turned broadside the instant that its nose touched the sand,
and immediately it rolled over, with all its crew scrambling madly for
the shore.  The next breaker rolled them over and over, but eventually
they all succeeded in crawling to safety, and in a moment more their
ungainly craft had been washed up beside them.

The balance of the night the apes sat huddled close to one another for
warmth; while Mugambi built a fire close to them over which he
crouched.  Tarzan and Sheeta, however, were of a different mind, for
neither of them feared the jungle night, and the insistent craving of
their hunger sent them off into the Stygian blackness of the forest in
search of prey.

Side by side they walked when there was room for two abreast.  At other
times in single file, first one and then the other in advance.  It was
Tarzan who first caught the scent of meat--a bull buffalo--and
presently the two came stealthily upon the sleeping beast in the midst
of a dense jungle of reeds close to a river.

Closer and closer they crept toward the unsuspecting beast, Sheeta upon
his right side and Tarzan upon his left nearest the great heart.  They
had hunted together now for some time, so that they worked in unison,
with only low, purring sounds as signals.

For a moment they lay quite silent near their prey, and then at a sign
from the ape-man Sheeta sprang upon the great back, burying his strong
teeth in the bull's neck.   Instantly the brute sprang to his feet with
a bellow of pain and rage, and at the same instant Tarzan rushed in
upon his left side with the stone knife, striking repeatedly behind the
shoulder.

One of the ape-man's hands clutched the thick mane, and as the bull
raced madly through the reeds the thing striking at his life was
dragged beside him.  Sheeta but clung tenaciously to his hold upon the
neck and back, biting deep in an effort to reach the spine.

For several hundred yards the bellowing bull carried his two savage
antagonists, until at last the blade found his heart, when with a final
bellow that was half-scream he plunged headlong to the earth.  Then
Tarzan and Sheeta feasted to repletion.

After the meal the two curled up together in a thicket, the man's black
head pillowed upon the tawny side of the panther.   Shortly after dawn
they awoke and ate again, and then returned to the beach that Tarzan
might lead the balance of the pack to the kill.

When the meal was done the brutes were for curling up to sleep, so
Tarzan and Mugambi set off in search of the Ugambi River.   They had
proceeded scarce a hundred yards when they came suddenly upon a broad
stream, which the Negro instantly recognized as that down which he and
his warriors had paddled to the sea upon their ill-starred expedition.

The two now followed the stream down to the ocean, finding that it
emptied into a bay not over a mile from the point upon the beach at
which the canoe had been thrown the night before.

Tarzan was much elated by the discovery, as he knew that in the
vicinity of a large watercourse he should find natives, and from some
of these he had little doubt but that he should obtain news of Rokoff
and the child, for he felt reasonably certain that the Russian would
rid himself of the baby as quickly as possible after having disposed of
Tarzan.

He and Mugambi now righted and launched the dugout, though it was a
most difficult feat in the face of the surf which rolled continuously
in upon the beach; but at last they were successful, and soon after
were paddling up the coast toward the mouth of the Ugambi.  Here they
experienced considerable difficulty in making an entrance against the
combined current and ebb tide, but by taking advantage of eddies close
in to shore they came about dusk to a point nearly opposite the spot
where they had left the pack asleep.

Making the craft fast to an overhanging bough, the two made their way
into the jungle, presently coming upon some of the apes feeding upon
fruit a little beyond the reeds where the buffalo had fallen.  Sheeta
was not anywhere to be seen, nor did he return that night, so that
Tarzan came to believe that he had wandered away in search of his own
kind.

Early the next morning the ape-man led his band down to the river, and
as he walked he gave vent to a series of shrill cries.  Presently from
a great distance and faintly there came an answering scream, and a
half-hour later the lithe form of Sheeta bounded into view where the
others of the pack were clambering gingerly into the canoe.

The great beast, with arched back and purring like a contented tabby,
rubbed his sides against the ape-man, and then at a word from the
latter sprang lightly to his former place in the bow of the dugout.

When all were in place it was discovered that two of the apes of Akut
were missing, and though both the king ape and Tarzan called to them
for the better part of an hour, there was no response, and finally the
boat put off without them.   As it happened that the two missing ones
were the very same who had evinced the least desire to accompany the
expedition from the island, and had suffered the most from fright
during the voyage, Tarzan was quite sure that they had absented
themselves purposely rather than again enter the canoe.

As the party were putting in for the shore shortly after noon to search
for food a slender, naked savage watched them for a moment from behind
the dense screen of verdure which lined the river's bank, then he
melted away up-stream before any of those in the canoe discovered him.

Like a deer he bounded along the narrow trail until, filled with the
excitement of his news, he burst into a native village several miles
above the point at which Tarzan and his pack had stopped to hunt.

"Another white man is coming!" he cried to the chief who squatted
before the entrance to his circular hut.   "Another white man, and with
him are many warriors.   They come in a great war-canoe to kill and rob
as did the black-bearded one who has just left us."

Kaviri leaped to his feet.  He had but recently had a taste of the
white man's medicine, and his savage heart was filled with bitterness
and hate.  In another moment the rumble of the war-drums rose from the
village, calling in the hunters from the forest and the tillers from
the fields.

Seven war-canoes were launched and manned by paint-daubed, befeathered
warriors.  Long spears bristled from the rude battle-ships, as they
slid noiselessly over the bosom of the water, propelled by giant
muscles rolling beneath glistening, ebony hides.

There was no beating of tom-toms now, nor blare of native horn, for
Kaviri was a crafty warrior, and it was in his mind to take no chances,
if they could be avoided.  He would swoop noiselessly down with his
seven canoes upon the single one of the white man, and before the guns
of the latter could inflict much damage upon his people he would have
overwhelmed the enemy by force of numbers.

Kaviri's own canoe went in advance of the others a short distance, and
as it rounded a sharp bend in the river where the swift current bore it
rapidly on its way it came suddenly upon the thing that Kaviri sought.

So close were the two canoes to one another that the black had only an
opportunity to note the white face in the bow of the oncoming craft
before the two touched and his own men were upon their feet, yelling
like mad devils and thrusting their long spears at the occupants of the
other canoe.

But a moment later, when Kaviri was able to realize the nature of the
crew that manned the white man's dugout, he would have given all the
beads and iron wire that he possessed to have been safely within his
distant village.   Scarcely had the two craft come together than the
frightful apes of Akut rose, growling and barking, from the bottom of
the canoe, and, with long, hairy arms far outstretched, grasped the
menacing spears from the hands of Kaviri's warriors.

The blacks were overcome with terror, but there was nothing to do other
than to fight.  Now came the other war-canoes rapidly down upon the two
craft.  Their occupants were eager to join the battle, for they thought
that their foes were white men and their native porters.

They swarmed about Tarzan's craft; but when they saw the nature of the
enemy all but one turned and paddled swiftly up-river.   That one came
too close to the ape-man's craft before its occupants realized that
their fellows were pitted against demons instead of men.  As it touched
Tarzan spoke a few low words to Sheeta and Akut, so that before the
attacking warriors could draw away there sprang upon them with a
blood-freezing scream a huge panther, and into the other end of their
canoe clambered a great ape.

At one end the panther wrought fearful havoc with his mighty talons and
long, sharp fangs, while Akut at the other buried his yellow canines in
the necks of those that came within his reach, hurling the
terror-stricken blacks overboard as he made his way toward the centre
of the canoe.

Kaviri was so busily engaged with the demons that had entered his own
craft that he could offer no assistance to his warriors in the other.
A giant of a white devil had wrested his spear from him as though he,
the mighty Kaviri, had been but a new-born babe.  Hairy monsters were
overcoming his fighting men, and a black chieftain like himself was
fighting shoulder to shoulder with the hideous pack that opposed him.

Kaviri battled bravely against his antagonist, for he felt that death
had already claimed him, and so the least that he could do would be to
sell his life as dearly as possible; but it was soon evident that his
best was quite futile when pitted against the superhuman brawn and
agility of the creature that at last found his throat and bent him back
into the bottom of the canoe.

Presently Kaviri's head began to whirl--objects became confused and dim
before his eyes--there was a great pain in his chest as he struggled
for the breath of life that the thing upon him was shutting off for
ever.  Then he lost consciousness.

When he opened his eyes once more he found, much to his surprise, that
he was not dead.  He lay, securely bound, in the bottom of his own
canoe.  A great panther sat upon its haunches, looking down upon him.

Kaviri shuddered and closed his eyes again, waiting for the ferocious
creature to spring upon him and put him out of his misery of terror.

After a moment, no rending fangs having buried themselves in his
trembling body, he again ventured to open his eyes.   Beyond the
panther kneeled the white giant who had overcome him.

The man was wielding a paddle, while directly behind him Kaviri saw
some of his own warriors similarly engaged.   Back of them again
squatted several of the hairy apes.

Tarzan, seeing that the chief had regained consciousness, addressed him.

"Your warriors tell me that you are the chief of a numerous people, and
that your name is Kaviri," he said.

"Yes," replied the black.

"Why did you attack me?  I came in peace."

"Another white man 'came in peace' three moons ago," replied Kaviri;
"and after we had brought him presents of a goat and cassava and milk,
he set upon us with his guns and killed many of my people, and then
went on his way, taking all of our goats and many of our young men and
women."

"I am not as this other white man," replied Tarzan.   "I should not
have harmed you had you not set upon me.   Tell me, what was the face
of this bad white man like?  I am searching for one who has wronged me.
Possibly this may be the very one."

"He was a man with a bad face, covered with a great, black beard, and
he was very, very wicked--yes, very wicked indeed."

"Was there a little white child with him?" asked Tarzan, his heart
almost stopped as he awaited the black's answer.

"No, bwana," replied Kaviri, "the white child was not with this man's
party--it was with the other party."

"Other party!" exclaimed Tarzan.  "What other party?"

"With the party that the very bad white man was pursuing.   There was a
white man, woman, and the child, with six Mosula porters.  They passed
up the river three days ahead of the very bad white man.  I think that
they were running away from him."

A white man, woman, and child!  Tarzan was puzzled.  The child must be
his little Jack; but who could the woman be--and the man?  Was it
possible that one of Rokoff's confederates had conspired with some
woman--who had accompanied the Russian--to steal the baby from him?

If this was the case, they had doubtless purposed returning the child
to civilization and there either claiming a reward or holding the
little prisoner for ransom.

But now that Rokoff had succeeded in chasing them far inland, up the
savage river, there could be little doubt but that he would eventually
overhaul them, unless, as was still more probable, they should be
captured and killed by the very cannibals farther up the Ugambi, to
whom, Tarzan was now convinced, it had been Rokoff's intention to
deliver the baby.

As he talked to Kaviri the canoes had been moving steadily up-river
toward the chief's village.  Kaviri's warriors plied the paddles in the
three canoes, casting sidelong, terrified glances at their hideous
passengers.  Three of the apes of Akut had been killed in the
encounter, but there were, with Akut, eight of the frightful beasts
remaining, and there was Sheeta, the panther, and Tarzan and Mugambi.

Kaviri's warriors thought that they had never seen so terrible a crew
in all their lives.  Momentarily they expected to be pounced upon and
torn asunder by some of their captors; and, in fact, it was all that
Tarzan and Mugambi and Akut could do to keep the snarling, ill-natured
brutes from snapping at the glistening, naked bodies that brushed
against them now and then with the movements of the paddlers, whose
very fear added incitement to the beasts.

At Kaviri's camp Tarzan paused only long enough to eat the food that
the blacks furnished, and arrange with the chief for a dozen men to man
the paddles of his canoe.

Kaviri was only too glad to comply with any demands that the ape-man
might make if only such compliance would hasten the departure of the
horrid pack; but it was easier, he discovered, to promise men than to
furnish them, for when his people learned his intentions those that had
not already fled into the jungle proceeded to do so without loss of
time, so that when Kaviri turned to point out those who were to
accompany Tarzan, he discovered that he was the only member of his
tribe left within the village.

Tarzan could not repress a smile.

"They do not seem anxious to accompany us," he said; "but just remain
quietly here, Kaviri, and presently you shall see your people flocking
to your side."

Then the ape-man rose, and, calling his pack about him, commanded that
Mugambi remain with Kaviri, and disappeared in the jungle with Sheeta
and the apes at his heels.

For half an hour the silence of the grim forest was broken only by the
ordinary sounds of the teeming life that but adds to its lowering
loneliness.  Kaviri and Mugambi sat alone in the palisaded village,
waiting.

Presently from a great distance came a hideous sound.   Mugambi
recognized the weird challenge of the ape-man.   Immediately from
different points of the compass rose a horrid semicircle of similar
shrieks and screams, punctuated now and again by the blood-curdling cry
of a hungry panther.




Chapter 7

Betrayed


The two savages, Kaviri and Mugambi, squatting before the entrance to
Kaviri's hut, looked at one another--Kaviri with ill-concealed alarm.

"What is it?" he whispered.

"It is Bwana Tarzan and his people," replied Mugambi.   "But what they
are doing I know not, unless it be that they are devouring your people
who ran away."

Kaviri shuddered and rolled his eyes fearfully toward the jungle.  In
all his long life in the savage forest he had never heard such an
awful, fearsome din.

Closer and closer came the sounds, and now with them were mingled the
terrified shrieks of women and children and of men.  For twenty long
minutes the blood-curdling cries continued, until they seemed but a
stone's throw from the palisade.  Kaviri rose to flee, but Mugambi
seized and held him, for such had been the command of Tarzan.

A moment later a horde of terrified natives burst from the jungle,
racing toward the shelter of their huts.  Like frightened sheep they
ran, and behind them, driving them as sheep might be driven, came
Tarzan and Sheeta and the hideous apes of Akut.

Presently Tarzan stood before Kaviri, the old quiet smile upon his lips.

"Your people have returned, my brother," he said, "and now you may
select those who are to accompany me and paddle my canoe."

Tremblingly Kaviri tottered to his feet, calling to his people to come
from their huts; but none responded to his summons.

"Tell them," suggested Tarzan, "that if they do not come I shall send
my people in after them."

Kaviri did as he was bid, and in an instant the entire population of
the village came forth, their wide and frightened eyes rolling from one
to another of the savage creatures that wandered about the village
street.

Quickly Kaviri designated a dozen warriors to accompany Tarzan.  The
poor fellows went almost white with terror at the prospect of close
contact with the panther and the apes in the narrow confines of the
canoes; but when Kaviri explained to them that there was no
escape--that Bwana Tarzan would pursue them with his grim horde should
they attempt to run away from the duty--they finally went gloomily down
to the river and took their places in the canoe.

It was with a sigh of relief that their chieftain saw the party
disappear about a headland a short distance up-river.

For three days the strange company continued farther and farther into
the heart of the savage country that lies on either side of the almost
unexplored Ugambi.  Three of the twelve warriors deserted during that
time; but as several of the apes had finally learned the secret of the
paddles, Tarzan felt no dismay because of the loss.

As a matter of fact, he could have travelled much more rapidly on
shore, but he believed that he could hold his own wild crew together to
better advantage by keeping them to the boat as much as possible.
Twice a day they landed to hunt and feed, and at night they slept upon
the bank of the mainland or on one of the numerous little islands that
dotted the river.

Before them the natives fled in alarm, so that they found only deserted
villages in their path as they proceeded.   Tarzan was anxious to get
in touch with some of the savages who dwelt upon the river's banks, but
so far he had been unable to do so.

Finally he decided to take to the land himself, leaving his company to
follow after him by boat.  He explained to Mugambi the thing that he
had in mind, and told Akut to follow the directions of the black.

"I will join you again in a few days," he said.  "Now I go ahead to
learn what has become of the very bad white man whom I seek."

At the next halt Tarzan took to the shore, and was soon lost to the
view of his people.

The first few villages he came to were deserted, showing that news of
the coming of his pack had travelled rapidly; but toward evening he
came upon a distant cluster of thatched huts surrounded by a rude
palisade, within which were a couple of hundred natives.

The women were preparing the evening meal as Tarzan of the Apes poised
above them in the branches of a giant tree which overhung the palisade
at one point.

The ape-man was at a loss as to how he might enter into communication
with these people without either frightening them or arousing their
savage love of battle.  He had no desire to fight now, for he was upon
a much more important mission than that of battling with every chance
tribe that he should happen to meet with.

At last he hit upon a plan, and after seeing that he was concealed from
the view of those below, he gave a few hoarse grunts in imitation of a
panther.  All eyes immediately turned upward toward the foliage above.

It was growing dark, and they could not penetrate the leafy screen
which shielded the ape-man from their view.  The moment that he had won
their attention he raised his voice to the shriller and more hideous
scream of the beast he personated, and then, scarce stirring a leaf in
his descent, dropped to the ground once again outside the palisade,
and, with the speed of a deer, ran quickly round to the village gate.

Here he beat upon the fibre-bound saplings of which the barrier was
constructed, shouting to the natives in their own tongue that he was a
friend who wished food and shelter for the night.

Tarzan knew well the nature of the black man.  He was aware that the
grunting and screaming of Sheeta in the tree above them would set their
nerves on edge, and that his pounding upon their gate after dark would
still further add to their terror.

That they did not reply to his hail was no surprise, for natives are
fearful of any voice that comes out of the night from beyond their
palisades, attributing it always to some demon or other ghostly
visitor; but still he continued to call.

"Let me in, my friends!" he cried.  "I am a white man pursuing the very
bad white man who passed this way a few days ago.  I follow to punish
him for the sins he has committed against you and me.

"If you doubt my friendship, I will prove it to you by going into the
tree above your village and driving Sheeta back into the jungle before
he leaps among you.  If you will not promise to take me in and treat me
as a friend I shall let Sheeta stay and devour you."

For a moment there was silence.  Then the voice of an old man came out
of the quiet of the village street.

"If you are indeed a white man and a friend, we will let you come in;
but first you must drive Sheeta away."

"Very well," replied Tarzan.  "Listen, and you shall hear Sheeta
fleeing before me."

The ape-man returned quickly to the tree, and this time he made a great
noise as he entered the branches, at the same time growling ominously
after the manner of the panther, so that those below would believe that
the great beast was still there.

When he reached a point well above the village street he made a great
commotion, shaking the tree violently, crying aloud to the panther to
flee or be killed, and punctuating his own voice with the screams and
mouthings of an angry beast.

Presently he raced toward the opposite side of the tree and off into
the jungle, pounding loudly against the boles of trees as he went, and
voicing the panther's diminishing growls as he drew farther and farther
away from the village.

A few minutes later he returned to the village gate, calling to the
natives within.

"I have driven Sheeta away," he said.  "Now come and admit me as you
promised."

For a time there was the sound of excited discussion within the
palisade, but at length a half-dozen warriors came and opened the
gates, peering anxiously out in evident trepidation as to the nature of
the creature which they should find waiting there.  They were not much
relieved at sight of an almost naked white man; but when Tarzan had
reassured them in quiet tones, protesting his friendship for them, they
opened the barrier a trifle farther and admitted him.

When the gates had been once more secured the self-confidence of the
savages returned, and as Tarzan walked up the village street toward the
chief's hut he was surrounded by a host of curious men, women, and
children.

From the chief he learned that Rokoff had passed up the river a week
previous, and that he had horns growing from his forehead, and was
accompanied by a thousand devils.   Later the chief said that the very
bad white man had remained a month in his village.

Though none of these statements agreed with Kaviri's, that the Russian
was but three days gone from the chieftain's village and that his
following was much smaller than now stated, Tarzan was in no manner
surprised at the discrepancies, for he was quite familiar with the
savage mind's strange manner of functioning.

What he was most interested in knowing was that he was upon the right
trail, and that it led toward the interior.  In this circumstance he
knew that Rokoff could never escape him.

After several hours of questioning and cross-questioning the ape-man
learned that another party had preceded the Russian by several
days--three whites--a man, a woman, and a little man-child, with
several Mosulas.

Tarzan explained to the chief that his people would follow him in a
canoe, probably the next day, and that though he might go on ahead of
them the chief was to receive them kindly and have no fear of them, for
Mugambi would see that they did not harm the chief's people, if they
were accorded a friendly reception.

"And now," he concluded, "I shall lie down beneath this tree and sleep.
I am very tired.  Permit no one to disturb me."

The chief offered him a hut, but Tarzan, from past experience of native
dwellings, preferred the open air, and, further, he had plans of his
own that could be better carried out if he remained beneath the tree.
He gave as his reason a desire to be close at hand should Sheeta
return, and after this explanation the chief was very glad to permit
him to sleep beneath the tree.

Tarzan had always found that it stood him in good stead to leave with
natives the impression that he was to some extent possessed of more or
less miraculous powers.  He might easily have entered their village
without recourse to the gates, but he believed that a sudden and
unaccountable disappearance when he was ready to leave them would
result in a more lasting impression upon their childlike minds, and so
as soon as the village was quiet in sleep he rose, and, leaping into
the branches of the tree above him, faded silently into the black
mystery of the jungle night.

All the balance of that night the ape-man swung rapidly through the
upper and middle terraces of the forest.  When the going was good there
he preferred the upper branches of the giant trees, for then his way
was better lighted by the moon; but so accustomed were all his senses
to the grim world of his birth that it was possible for him, even in
the dense, black shadows near the ground, to move with ease and
rapidity.   You or I walking beneath the arcs of Main Street, or
Broadway, or State Street, could not have moved more surely or with a
tenth the speed of the agile ape-man through the gloomy mazes that
would have baffled us entirely.

At dawn he stopped to feed, and then he slept for several hours, taking
up the pursuit again toward noon.

Twice he came upon natives, and, though he had considerable difficulty
in approaching them, he succeeded in each instance in quieting both
their fears and bellicose intentions toward him, and learned from them
that he was upon the trail of the Russian.

Two days later, still following up the Ugambi, he came upon a large
village.  The chief, a wicked-looking fellow with the sharp-filed teeth
that often denote the cannibal, received him with apparent friendliness.

The ape-man was now thoroughly fatigued, and had determined to rest for
eight or ten hours that he might be fresh and strong when he caught up
with Rokoff, as he was sure he must do within a very short time.

The chief told him that the bearded white man had left his village only
the morning before, and that doubtless he would be able to overtake him
in a short time.  The other party the chief had not seen or heard of,
so he said.

Tarzan did not like the appearance or manner of the fellow, who seemed,
though friendly enough, to harbour a certain contempt for this
half-naked white man who came with no followers and offered no
presents; but he needed the rest and food that the village would afford
him with less effort than the jungle, and so, as he knew no fear of
man, beast, or devil, he curled himself up in the shadow of a hut and
was soon asleep.

Scarcely had he left the chief than the latter called two of his
warriors, to whom he whispered a few instructions.   A moment later the
sleek, black bodies were racing along the river path, up-stream, toward
the east.

In the village the chief maintained perfect quiet.  He would permit no
one to approach the sleeping visitor, nor any singing, nor loud
talking.  He was remarkably solicitous lest his guest be disturbed.

Three hours later several canoes came silently into view from up the
Ugambi.  They were being pushed ahead rapidly by the brawny muscles of
their black crews.  Upon the bank before the river stood the chief, his
spear raised in a horizontal position above his head, as though in some
manner of predetermined signal to those within the boats.

And such indeed was the purpose of his attitude--which meant that the
white stranger within his village still slept peacefully.

In the bows of two of the canoes were the runners that the chief had
sent forth three hours earlier.  It was evident that they had been
dispatched to follow and bring back this party, and that the signal
from the bank was one that had been determined upon before they left
the village.

In a few moments the dugouts drew up to the verdure-clad bank.   The
native warriors filed out, and with them a half-dozen white men.
Sullen, ugly-looking customers they were, and none more so than the
evil-faced, black-bearded man who commanded them.

"Where is the white man your messengers report to be with you?" he
asked of the chief.

"This way, bwana," replied the native.  "Carefully have I kept silence
in the village that he might be still asleep when you returned.  I do
not know that he is one who seeks you to do you harm, but he questioned
me closely about your coming and your going, and his appearance is as
that of the one you described, but whom you believed safe in the
country which you called Jungle Island.

"Had you not told me this tale I should not have recognized him, and
then he might have gone after and slain you.   If he is a friend and no
enemy, then no harm has been done, bwana; but if he proves to be an
enemy, I should like very much to have a rifle and some ammunition."

"You have done well," replied the white man, "and you shall have the
rifle and ammunition whether he be a friend or enemy, provided that you
stand with me."

"I shall stand with you, bwana," said the chief, "and now come and look
upon the stranger, who sleeps within my village."

So saying, he turned and led the way toward the hut, in the shadow of
which the unconscious Tarzan slept peacefully.

Behind the two men came the remaining whites and a score of warriors;
but the raised forefingers of the chief and his companion held them all
to perfect silence.

As they turned the corner of the hut, cautiously and upon tiptoe, an
ugly smile touched the lips of the white as his eyes fell upon the
giant figure of the sleeping ape-man.

The chief looked at the other inquiringly.  The latter nodded his head,
to signify that the chief had made no mistake in his suspicions.  Then
he turned to those behind him and, pointing to the sleeping man,
motioned for them to seize and bind him.

A moment later a dozen brutes had leaped upon the surprised Tarzan, and
so quickly did they work that he was securely bound before he could
make half an effort to escape.

Then they threw him down upon his back, and as his eyes turned toward
the crowd that stood near, they fell upon the malign face of Nikolas
Rokoff.

A sneer curled the Russian's lips.  He stepped quite close to Tarzan.

"Pig!" he cried.  "Have you not learned sufficient wisdom to keep away
from Nikolas Rokoff?"

Then he kicked the prostrate man full in the face.

"That for your welcome," he said.

"Tonight, before my Ethiop friends eat you, I shall tell you what has
already befallen your wife and child, and what further plans I have for
their futures."




Chapter 8

The Dance of Death


Through the luxuriant, tangled vegetation of the Stygian jungle night a
great lithe body made its way sinuously and in utter silence upon its
soft padded feet.  Only two blazing points of yellow-green flame shone
occasionally with the reflected light of the equatorial moon that now
and again pierced the softly sighing roof rustling in the night wind.

Occasionally the beast would stop with high-held nose, sniffing
searchingly.  At other times a quick, brief incursion into the branches
above delayed it momentarily in its steady journey toward the east.  To
its sensitive nostrils came the subtle unseen spoor of many a tender
four-footed creature, bringing the slaver of hunger to the cruel,
drooping jowl.

But steadfastly it kept on its way, strangely ignoring the cravings of
appetite that at another time would have sent the rolling, fur-clad
muscles flying at some soft throat.

All that night the creature pursued its lonely way, and the next day it
halted only to make a single kill, which it tore to fragments and
devoured with sullen, grumbling rumbles as though half famished for
lack of food.

It was dusk when it approached the palisade that surrounded a large
native village.  Like the shadow of a swift and silent death it circled
the village, nose to ground, halting at last close to the palisade,
where it almost touched the backs of several huts.  Here the beast
sniffed for a moment, and then, turning its head upon one side,
listened with up-pricked ears.

What it heard was no sound by the standards of human ears, yet to the
highly attuned and delicate organs of the beast a message seemed to be
borne to the savage brain.  A wondrous transformation was wrought in
the motionless mass of statuesque bone and muscle that had an instant
before stood as though carved out of the living bronze.

As if it had been poised upon steel springs, suddenly released, it rose
quickly and silently to the top of the palisade, disappearing,
stealthily and cat-like, into the dark space between the wall and the
back of an adjacent hut.

In the village street beyond women were preparing many little fires and
fetching cooking-pots filled with water, for a great feast was to be
celebrated ere the night was many hours older.   About a stout stake
near the centre of the circling fires a little knot of black warriors
stood conversing, their bodies smeared with white and blue and ochre in
broad and grotesque bands.   Great circles of colour were drawn about
their eyes and lips, their breasts and abdomens, and from their
clay-plastered coiffures rose gay feathers and bits of long, straight
wire.

The village was preparing for the feast, while in a hut at one side of
the scene of the coming orgy the bound victim of their bestial
appetites lay waiting for the end.  And such an end!

Tarzan of the Apes, tensing his mighty muscles, strained at the bonds
that pinioned him; but they had been re-enforced many times at the
instigation of the Russian, so that not even the ape-man's giant brawn
could budge them.

Death!

Tarzan had looked the Hideous Hunter in the face many a time, and
smiled.  And he would smile again tonight when he knew the end was
coming quickly; but now his thoughts were not of himself, but of those
others--the dear ones who must suffer most because of his passing.

Jane would never know the manner of it.  For that he thanked Heaven;
and he was thankful also that she at least was safe in the heart of the
world's greatest city.  Safe among kind and loving friends who would do
their best to lighten her misery.

But the boy!

Tarzan writhed at the thought of him.  His son!  And now he--the mighty
Lord of the Jungle--he, Tarzan, King of the Apes, the only one in all
the world fitted to find and save the child from the horrors that
Rokoff's evil mind had planned--had been trapped like a silly, dumb
creature.  He was to die in a few hours, and with him would go the
child's last chance of succour.

Rokoff had been in to see and revile and abuse him several times during
the afternoon; but he had been able to wring no word of remonstrance or
murmur of pain from the lips of the giant captive.

So at last he had given up, reserving his particular bit of exquisite
mental torture for the last moment, when, just before the savage spears
of the cannibals should for ever make the object of his hatred immune
to further suffering, the Russian planned to reveal to his enemy the
true whereabouts of his wife whom he thought safe in England.

Dusk had fallen upon the village, and the ape-men could hear the
preparations going forward for the torture and the feast.   The dance
of death he could picture in his mind's eye--for he had seen the thing
many times in the past.  Now he was to be the central figure, bound to
the stake.

The torture of the slow death as the circling warriors cut him to bits
with the fiendish skill, that mutilated without bringing
unconsciousness, had no terrors for him.  He was inured to suffering
and to the sight of blood and to cruel death; but the desire to live
was no less strong within him, and until the last spark of life should
flicker and go out, his whole being would remain quick with hope and
determination.   Let them relax their watchfulness but for an instant,
he knew that his cunning mind and giant muscles would find a way to
escape--escape and revenge.

As he lay, thinking furiously on every possibility of self-salvation,
there came to his sensitive nostrils a faint and a familiar scent.
Instantly every faculty of his mind was upon the alert.  Presently his
trained ears caught the sound of the soundless presence without--behind
the hut wherein he lay.   His lips moved, and though no sound came
forth that might have been appreciable to a human ear beyond the walls
of his prison, yet he realized that the one beyond would hear.  Already
he knew who that one was, for his nostrils had told him as plainly as
your eyes or mine tell us of the identity of an old friend whom we come
upon in broad daylight.

An instant later he heard the soft sound of a fur-clad body and padded
feet scaling the outer wall behind the hut and then a tearing at the
poles which formed the wall.   Presently through the hole thus made
slunk a great beast, pressing its cold muzzle close to his neck.

It was Sheeta, the panther.

The beast snuffed round the prostrate man, whining a little.  There was
a limit to the interchange of ideas which could take place between
these two, and so Tarzan could not be sure that Sheeta understood all
that he attempted to communicate to him.  That the man was tied and
helpless Sheeta could, of course, see; but that to the mind of the
panther this would carry any suggestion of harm in so far as his master
was concerned, Tarzan could not guess.

What had brought the beast to him?  The fact that he had come augured
well for what he might accomplish; but when Tarzan tried to get Sheeta
to gnaw his bonds asunder the great animal could not seem to understand
what was expected of him, and, instead, but licked the wrists and arms
of the prisoner.

Presently there came an interruption.  Some one was approaching the
hut.  Sheeta gave a low growl and slunk into the blackness of a far
corner.  Evidently the visitor did not hear the warning sound, for
almost immediately he entered the hut--a tall, naked, savage warrior.

He came to Tarzan's side and pricked him with a spear.   From the lips
of the ape-man came a weird, uncanny sound, and in answer to it there
leaped from the blackness of the hut's farthermost corner a bolt of
fur-clad death.  Full upon the breast of the painted savage the great
beast struck, burying sharp talons in the black flesh and sinking great
yellow fangs in the ebon throat.

There was a fearful scream of anguish and terror from the black, and
mingled with it was the hideous challenge of the killing panther.  Then
came silence--silence except for the rending of bloody flesh and the
crunching of human bones between mighty jaws.

The noise had brought sudden quiet to the village without.   Then there
came the sound of voices in consultation.

High-pitched, fear-filled voices, and deep, low tones of authority, as
the chief spoke.  Tarzan and the panther heard the approaching
footsteps of many men, and then, to Tarzan's surprise, the great cat
rose from across the body of its kill, and slunk noiselessly from the
hut through the aperture through which it had entered.

The man heard the soft scraping of the body as it passed over the top
of the palisade, and then silence.  From the opposite side of the hut
he heard the savages approaching to investigate.

He had little hope that Sheeta would return, for had the great cat
intended to defend him against all comers it would have remained by his
side as it heard the approaching savages without.

Tarzan knew how strange were the workings of the brains of the mighty
carnivora of the jungle--how fiendishly fearless they might be in the
face of certain death, and again how timid upon the slightest
provocation.  There was doubt in his mind that some note of the
approaching blacks vibrating with fear had struck an answering chord in
the nervous system of the panther, sending him slinking through the
jungle, his tail between his legs.

The man shrugged.  Well, what of it?  He had expected to die, and,
after all, what might Sheeta have done for him other than to maul a
couple of his enemies before a rifle in the hands of one of the whites
should have dispatched him!

If the cat could have released him!  Ah! that would have resulted in a
very different story; but it had proved beyond the understanding of
Sheeta, and now the beast was gone and Tarzan must definitely abandon
hope.

The natives were at the entrance to the hut now, peering fearfully into
the dark interior.  Two in advance held lighted torches in their left
hands and ready spears in their right.   They held back timorously
against those behind, who were pushing them forward.

The shrieks of the panther's victim, mingled with those of the great
cat, had wrought mightily upon their poor nerves, and now the awful
silence of the dark interior seemed even more terribly ominous than had
the frightful screaming.

Presently one of those who was being forced unwillingly within hit upon
a happy scheme for learning first the precise nature of the danger
which menaced him from the silent interior.   With a quick movement he
flung his lighted torch into the centre of the hut.  Instantly all
within was illuminated for a brief second before the burning brand was
dashed out against the earth floor.

There was the figure of the white prisoner still securely bound as they
had last seen him, and in the centre of the hut another figure equally
as motionless, its throat and breasts horribly torn and mangled.

The sight that met the eyes of the foremost savages inspired more
terror within their superstitious breasts than would the presence of
Sheeta, for they saw only the result of a ferocious attack upon one of
their fellows.

Not seeing the cause, their fear-ridden minds were free to attribute
the ghastly work to supernatural causes, and with the thought they
turned, screaming, from the hut, bowling over those who stood directly
behind them in the exuberance of their terror.

For an hour Tarzan heard only the murmur of excited voices from the far
end of the village.  Evidently the savages were once more attempting to
work up their flickering courage to a point that would permit them to
make another invasion of the hut, for now and then came a savage yell,
such as the warriors give to bolster up their bravery upon the field of
battle.

But in the end it was two of the whites who first entered, carrying
torches and guns.  Tarzan was not surprised to discover that neither of
them was Rokoff.  He would have wagered his soul that no power on earth
could have tempted that great coward to face the unknown menace of the
hut.

When the natives saw that the white men were not attacked they, too,
crowded into the interior, their voices hushed with terror as they
looked upon the mutilated corpse of their comrade.   The whites tried
in vain to elicit an explanation from Tarzan; but to all their queries
he but shook his head, a grim and knowing smile curving his lips.

At last Rokoff came.

His face grew very white as his eyes rested upon the bloody thing
grinning up at him from the floor, the face set in a death mask of
excruciating horror.

"Come!" he said to the chief.  "Let us get to work and finish this
demon before he has an opportunity to repeat this thing upon more of
your people."

The chief gave orders that Tarzan should be lifted and carried to the
stake; but it was several minutes before he could prevail upon any of
his men to touch the prisoner.

At last, however, four of the younger warriors dragged Tarzan roughly
from the hut, and once outside the pall of terror seemed lifted from
the savage hearts.

A score of howling blacks pushed and buffeted the prisoner down the
village street and bound him to the post in the centre of the circle of
little fires and boiling cooking-pots.

When at last he was made fast and seemed quite helpless and beyond the
faintest hope of succour, Rokoff's shrivelled wart of courage swelled
to its usual proportions when danger was not present.

He stepped close to the ape-man, and, seizing a spear from the hands of
one of the savages, was the first to prod the helpless victim.  A
little stream of blood trickled down the giant's smooth skin from the
wound in his side; but no murmur of pain passed his lips.

The smile of contempt upon his face seemed to infuriate the Russian.
With a volley of oaths he leaped at the helpless captive, beating him
upon the face with his clenched fists and kicking him mercilessly about
the legs.

Then he raised the heavy spear to drive it through the mighty heart,
and still Tarzan of the Apes smiled contemptuously upon him.

Before Rokoff could drive the weapon home the chief sprang upon him and
dragged him away from his intended victim.

"Stop, white man!" he cried.  "Rob us of this prisoner and our
death-dance, and you yourself may have to take his place."

The threat proved most effective in keeping the Russian from further
assaults upon the prisoner, though he continued to stand a little apart
and hurl taunts at his enemy.  He told Tarzan that he himself was going
to eat the ape-man's heart.   He enlarged upon the horrors of the
future life of Tarzan's son, and intimated that his vengeance would
reach as well to Jane Clayton.

"You think your wife safe in England," said Rokoff.   "Poor fool!  She
is even now in the hands of one not even of decent birth, and far from
the safety of London and the protection of her friends.  I had not
meant to tell you this until I could bring to you upon Jungle Island
proof of her fate.

"Now that you are about to die the most unthinkably horrid death that
it is given a white man to die--let this word of the plight of your
wife add to the torments that you must suffer before the last savage
spear-thrust releases you from your torture."

The dance had commenced now, and the yells of the circling warriors
drowned Rokoff's further attempts to distress his victim.

The leaping savages, the flickering firelight playing upon their
painted bodies, circled about the victim at the stake.

To Tarzan's memory came a similar scene, when he had rescued D'Arnot
from a like predicament at the last moment before the final
spear-thrust should have ended his sufferings.   Who was there now to
rescue him?  In all the world there was none able to save him from the
torture and the death.

The thought that these human fiends would devour him when the dance was
done caused him not a single qualm of horror or disgust.  It did not
add to his sufferings as it would have to those of an ordinary white
man, for all his life Tarzan had seen the beasts of the jungle devour
the flesh of their kills.

Had he not himself battled for the grisly forearm of a great ape at
that long-gone Dum-Dum, when he had slain the fierce Tublat and won his
niche in the respect of the Apes of Kerchak?

The dancers were leaping more closely to him now.  The spears were
commencing to find his body in the first torturing pricks that prefaced
the more serious thrusts.

It would not be long now.  The ape-man longed for the last savage lunge
that would end his misery.

And then, far out in the mazes of the weird jungle, rose a shrill
scream.

For an instant the dancers paused, and in the silence of the interval
there rose from the lips of the fast-bound white man an answering
shriek, more fearsome and more terrible than that of the jungle-beast
that had roused it.

For several minutes the blacks hesitated; then, at the urging of Rokoff
and their chief, they leaped in to finish the dance and the victim; but
ere ever another spear touched the brown hide a tawny streak of
green-eyed hate and ferocity bounded from the door of the hut in which
Tarzan had been imprisoned, and Sheeta, the panther, stood snarling
beside his master.

For an instant the blacks and the whites stood transfixed with terror.
Their eyes were riveted upon the bared fangs of the jungle cat.

Only Tarzan of the Apes saw what else there was emerging from the dark
interior of the hut.




Chapter 9

Chivalry or Villainy


From her cabin port upon the Kincaid, Jane Clayton had seen her husband
rowed to the verdure-clad shore of Jungle Island, and then the ship
once more proceeded upon its way.

For several days she saw no one other than Sven Anderssen, the
Kincaid's taciturn and repellent cook.  She asked him the name of the
shore upon which her husband had been set.

"Ay tank it blow purty soon purty hard," replied the Swede, and that
was all that she could get out of him.

She had come to the conclusion that he spoke no other English, and so
she ceased to importune him for information; but never did she forget
to greet him pleasantly or to thank him for the hideous, nauseating
meals he brought her.

Three days from the spot where Tarzan had been marooned the Kincaid
came to anchor in the mouth of a great river, and presently Rokoff came
to Jane Clayton's cabin.

"We have arrived, my dear," he said, with a sickening leer.   "I have
come to offer you safety, liberty, and ease.  My heart has been
softened toward you in your suffering, and I would make amends as best
I may.

"Your husband was a brute--you know that best who found him naked in
his native jungle, roaming wild with the savage beasts that were his
fellows.  Now I am a gentleman, not only born of noble blood, but
raised gently as befits a man of quality.

"To you, dear Jane, I offer the love of a cultured man and association
with one of culture and refinement, which you must have sorely missed
in your relations with the poor ape that through your girlish
infatuation you married so thoughtlessly.   I love you, Jane.  You have
but to say the word and no further sorrows shall afflict you--even your
baby shall be returned to you unharmed."

Outside the door Sven Anderssen paused with the noonday meal he had
been carrying to Lady Greystoke.  Upon the end of his long, stringy
neck his little head was cocked to one side, his close-set eyes were
half closed, his ears, so expressive was his whole attitude of stealthy
eavesdropping, seemed truly to be cocked forward--even his long,
yellow, straggly moustache appeared to assume a sly droop.

As Rokoff closed his appeal, awaiting the reply he invited, the look of
surprise upon Jane Clayton's face turned to one of disgust.  She fairly
shuddered in the fellow's face.

"I would not have been surprised, M.  Rokoff," she said, "had you
attempted to force me to submit to your evil desires, but that you
should be so fatuous as to believe that I, wife of John Clayton, would
come to you willingly, even to save my life, I should never have
imagined.  I have known you for a scoundrel, M.  Rokoff; but until now
I had not taken you for a fool."

Rokoff's eyes narrowed, and the red of mortification flushed out the
pallor of his face.  He took a step toward the girl, threateningly.

"We shall see who is the fool at last," he hissed, "when I have broken
you to my will and your plebeian Yankee stubbornness has cost you all
that you hold dear--even the life of your baby--for, by the bones of
St.  Peter, I'll forego all that I had planned for the brat and cut its
heart out before your very eyes.  You'll learn what it means to insult
Nikolas Rokoff."

Jane Clayton turned wearily away.

"What is the use," she said, "of expatiating upon the depths to which
your vengeful nature can sink?  You cannot move me either by threats or
deeds.  My baby cannot judge yet for himself, but I, his mother, can
foresee that should it have been given him to survive to man's estate
he would willingly sacrifice his life for the honour of his mother.
Love him as I do, I would not purchase his life at such a price.   Did
I, he would execrate my memory to the day of his death."

Rokoff was now thoroughly angered because of his failure to reduce the
girl to terror.  He felt only hate for her, but it had come to his
diseased mind that if he could force her to accede to his demands as
the price of her life and her child's, the cup of his revenge would be
filled to brimming when he could flaunt the wife of Lord Greystoke in
the capitals of Europe as his mistress.

Again he stepped closer to her.  His evil face was convulsed with rage
and desire.  Like a wild beast he sprang upon her, and with his strong
fingers at her throat forced her backward upon the berth.

At the same instant the door of the cabin opened noisily.   Rokoff
leaped to his feet, and, turning, faced the Swede cook.

Into the fellow's usually foxy eyes had come an expression of utter
stupidity.  His lower jaw drooped in vacuous harmony.   He busied
himself in arranging Lady Greystoke's meal upon the tiny table at one
side of her cabin.

The Russian glared at him.

"What do you mean," he cried, "by entering here without permission?
Get out!"

The cook turned his watery blue eyes upon Rokoff and smiled vacuously.

"Ay tank it blow purty soon purty hard," he said, and then he began
rearranging the few dishes upon the little table.

"Get out of here, or I'll throw you out, you miserable blockhead!"
roared Rokoff, taking a threatening step toward the Swede.

Anderssen continued to smile foolishly in his direction, but one
ham-like paw slid stealthily to the handle of the long, slim knife that
protruded from the greasy cord supporting his soiled apron.

Rokoff saw the move and stopped short in his advance.   Then he turned
toward Jane Clayton.

"I will give you until tomorrow," he said, "to reconsider your answer
to my offer.  All will be sent ashore upon one pretext or another
except you and the child, Paulvitch and myself.   Then without
interruption you will be able to witness the death of the baby."

He spoke in French that the cook might not understand the sinister
portent of his words.  When he had done he banged out of the cabin
without another look at the man who had interrupted him in his sorry
work.

When he had gone, Sven Anderssen turned toward Lady Greystoke--the
idiotic expression that had masked his thoughts had fallen away, and in
its place was one of craft and cunning.

"Hay tank Ay ban a fool," he said.  "Hay ben the fool.  Ay savvy
Franch."

Jane Clayton looked at him in surprise.

"You understood all that he said, then?"

Anderssen grinned.

"You bat," he said.

"And you heard what was going on in here and came to protect me?"

"You bane good to me," explained the Swede.  "Hay treat me like darty
dog.  Ay help you, lady.  You yust vait--Ay help you.  Ay ban Vast
Coast lots times."

"But how can you help me, Sven," she asked, "when all these men will be
against us?"

"Ay tank," said Sven Anderssen, "it blow purty soon purty hard," and
then he turned and left the cabin.

Though Jane Clayton doubted the cook's ability to be of any material
service to her, she was nevertheless deeply grateful to him for what he
already had done.  The feeling that among these enemies she had one
friend brought the first ray of comfort that had come to lighten the
burden of her miserable apprehensions throughout the long voyage of the
Kincaid.

She saw no more of Rokoff that day, nor of any other until Sven came
with her evening meal.  She tried to draw him into conversation
relative to his plans to aid her, but all that she could get from him
was his stereotyped prophecy as to the future state of the wind.  He
seemed suddenly to have relapsed into his wonted state of dense
stupidity.

However, when he was leaving her cabin a little later with the empty
dishes he whispered very low, "Leave on your clothes an' roll up your
blankets.  Ay come back after you purty soon."

He would have slipped from the room at once, but Jane laid her hand
upon his sleeve.

"My baby?" she asked.  "I cannot go without him."

"You do wot Ay tal you," said Anderssen, scowling.   "Ay ban halpin'
you, so don't you gat too fonny."

When he had gone Jane Clayton sank down upon her berth in utter
bewilderment.  What was she to do?  Suspicions as to the intentions of
the Swede swarmed her brain.  Might she not be infinitely worse off if
she gave herself into his power than she already was?

No, she could be no worse off in company with the devil himself than
with Nikolas Rokoff, for the devil at least bore the reputation of
being a gentleman.

She swore a dozen times that she would not leave the Kincaid without
her baby, and yet she remained clothed long past her usual hour for
retiring, and her blankets were neatly rolled and bound with stout
cord, when about midnight there came a stealthy scratching upon the
panels of her door.

Swiftly she crossed the room and drew the bolt.  Softly the door swung
open to admit the muffled figure of the Swede.   On one arm he carried
a bundle, evidently his blankets.   His other hand was raised in a
gesture commanding silence, a grimy forefinger upon his lips.

He came quite close to her.

"Carry this," he said.  "Do not make some noise when you see it.  It
ban your kid."

Quick hands snatched the bundle from the cook, and hungry mother arms
folded the sleeping infant to her breast, while hot tears of joy ran
down her cheeks and her whole frame shook with the emotion of the
moment.

"Come!" said Anderssen.  "We got no time to vaste."

He snatched up her bundle of blankets, and outside the cabin door his
own as well.  Then he led her to the ship's side, steadied her descent
of the monkey-ladder, holding the child for her as she climbed to the
waiting boat below.  A moment later he had cut the rope that held the
small boat to the steamer's side, and, bending silently to the muffled
oars, was pulling toward the black shadows up the Ugambi River.

Anderssen rowed on as though quite sure of his ground, and when after
half an hour the moon broke through the clouds there was revealed upon
their left the mouth of a tributary running into the Ugambi.  Up this
narrow channel the Swede turned the prow of the small boat.

Jane Clayton wondered if the man knew where he was bound.   She did not
know that in his capacity as cook he had that day been rowed up this
very stream to a little village where he had bartered with the natives
for such provisions as they had for sale, and that he had there
arranged the details of his plan for the adventure upon which they were
now setting forth.

Even though the moon was full, the surface of the small river was quite
dark.  The giant trees overhung its narrow banks, meeting in a great
arch above the centre of the river.   Spanish moss dropped from the
gracefully bending limbs, and enormous creepers clambered in riotous
profusion from the ground to the loftiest branch, falling in curving
loops almost to the water's placid breast.

Now and then the river's surface would be suddenly broken ahead of them
by a huge crocodile, startled by the splashing of the oars, or,
snorting and blowing, a family of hippos would dive from a sandy bar to
the cool, safe depths of the bottom.

From the dense jungles upon either side came the weird night cries of
the carnivora--the maniacal voice of the hyena, the coughing grunt of
the panther, the deep and awful roar of the lion.  And with them
strange, uncanny notes that the girl could not ascribe to any
particular night prowler--more terrible because of their mystery.

Huddled in the stern of the boat she sat with her baby strained close
to her bosom, and because of that little tender, helpless thing she was
happier tonight than she had been for many a sorrow-ridden day.

Even though she knew not to what fate she was going, or how soon that
fate might overtake her, still was she happy and thankful for the
moment, however brief, that she might press her baby tightly in her
arms.  She could scarce wait for the coming of the day that she might
look again upon the bright face of her little, black-eyed Jack.

Again and again she tried to strain her eyes through the blackness of
the jungle night to have but a tiny peep at those beloved features, but
only the dim outline of the baby face rewarded her efforts.  Then once
more she would cuddle the warm, little bundle close to her throbbing
heart.

It must have been close to three o'clock in the morning that Anderssen
brought the boat's nose to the shore before a clearing where could be
dimly seen in the waning moonlight a cluster of native huts encircled
by a thorn boma.

At the village gate they were admitted by a native woman, the wife of
the chief whom Anderssen had paid to assist him.   She took them to the
chief's hut, but Anderssen said that they would sleep without upon the
ground, and so, her duty having been completed, she left them to their
own devices.

The Swede, after explaining in his gruff way that the huts were
doubtless filthy and vermin-ridden, spread Jane's blankets on the
ground for her, and at a little distance unrolled his own and lay down
to sleep.

It was some time before the girl could find a comfortable position upon
the hard ground, but at last, the baby in the hollow of her arm, she
dropped asleep from utter exhaustion.   When she awoke it was broad
daylight.

About her were clustered a score of curious natives--mostly men, for
among the aborigines it is the male who owns this characteristic in its
most exaggerated form.   Instinctively Jane Clayton drew the baby more
closely to her, though she soon saw that the blacks were far from
intending her or the child any harm.

In fact, one of them offered her a gourd of milk--a filthy,
smoke-begrimed gourd, with the ancient rind of long-curdled milk caked
in layers within its neck; but the spirit of the giver touched her
deeply, and her face lightened for a moment with one of those almost
forgotten smiles of radiance that had helped to make her beauty famous
both in Baltimore and London.

She took the gourd in one hand, and rather than cause the giver pain
raised it to her lips, though for the life of her she could scarce
restrain the qualm of nausea that surged through her as the malodorous
thing approached her nostrils.

It was Anderssen who came to her rescue, and taking the gourd from her,
drank a portion himself, and then returned it to the native with a gift
of blue beads.

The sun was shining brightly now, and though the baby still slept, Jane
could scarce restrain her impatient desire to have at least a brief
glance at the beloved face.  The natives had withdrawn at a command
from their chief, who now stood talking with Anderssen, a little apart
from her.

As she debated the wisdom of risking disturbing the child's slumber by
lifting the blanket that now protected its face from the sun, she noted
that the cook conversed with the chief in the language of the Negro.

What a remarkable man the fellow was, indeed!  She had thought him
ignorant and stupid but a short day before, and now, within the past
twenty-four hours, she had learned that he spoke not only English but
French as well, and the primitive dialect of the West Coast.

She had thought him shifty, cruel, and untrustworthy, yet in so far as
she had reason to believe he had proved himself in every way the
contrary since the day before.  It scarce seemed credible that he could
be serving her from motives purely chivalrous.  There must be something
deeper in his intentions and plans than he had yet disclosed.

She wondered, and when she looked at him--at his close-set, shifty eyes
and repulsive features, she shuddered, for she was convinced that no
lofty characteristics could be hid behind so foul an exterior.

As she was thinking of these things the while she debated the wisdom of
uncovering the baby's face, there came a little grunt from the wee
bundle in her lap, and then a gurgling coo that set her heart in
raptures.

The baby was awake!  Now she might feast her eyes upon him.

Quickly she snatched the blanket from before the infant's face;
Anderssen was looking at her as she did so.

He saw her stagger to her feet, holding the baby at arm's length from
her, her eyes glued in horror upon the little chubby face and twinkling
eyes.

Then he heard her piteous cry as her knees gave beneath her, and she
sank to the ground in a swoon.




Chapter 10

The Swede


As the warriors, clustered thick about Tarzan and Sheeta, realized that
it was a flesh-and-blood panther that had interrupted their dance of
death, they took heart a trifle, for in the face of all those circling
spears even the mighty Sheeta would be doomed.

Rokoff was urging the chief to have his spearmen launch their missiles,
and the black was upon the instant of issuing the command, when his
eyes strayed beyond Tarzan, following the gaze of the ape-man.

With a yell of terror the chief turned and fled toward the village
gate, and as his people looked to see the cause of his fright, they too
took to their heels--for there, lumbering down upon them, their huge
forms exaggerated by the play of moonlight and camp fire, came the
hideous apes of Akut.

The instant the natives turned to flee the ape-man's savage cry rang
out above the shrieks of the blacks, and in answer to it Sheeta and the
apes leaped growling after the fugitives.   Some of the warriors turned
to battle with their enraged antagonists, but before the fiendish
ferocity of the fierce beasts they went down to bloody death.

Others were dragged down in their flight, and it was not until the
village was empty and the last of the blacks had disappeared into the
bush that Tarzan was able to recall his savage pack to his side.  Then
it was that he discovered to his chagrin that he could not make one of
them, not even the comparatively intelligent Akut, understand that he
wished to be freed from the bonds that held him to the stake.

In time, of course, the idea would filter through their thick skulls,
but in the meanwhile many things might happen--the blacks might return
in force to regain their village; the whites might readily pick them
all off with their rifles from the surrounding trees; he might even
starve to death before the dull-witted apes realized that he wished
them to gnaw through his bonds.

As for Sheeta--the great cat understood even less than the apes; but
yet Tarzan could not but marvel at the remarkable characteristics this
beast had evidenced.  That it felt real affection for him there seemed
little doubt, for now that the blacks were disposed of it walked slowly
back and forth about the stake, rubbing its sides against the ape-man's
legs and purring like a contented tabby.  That it had gone of its own
volition to bring the balance of the pack to his rescue, Tarzan could
not doubt.  His Sheeta was indeed a jewel among beasts.

Mugambi's absence worried the ape-man not a little.   He attempted to
learn from Akut what had become of the black, fearing that the beasts,
freed from the restraint of Tarzan's presence, might have fallen upon
the man and devoured him; but to all his questions the great ape but
pointed back in the direction from which they had come out of the
jungle.

The night passed with Tarzan still fast bound to the stake, and shortly
after dawn his fears were realized in the discovery of naked black
figures moving stealthily just within the edge of the jungle about the
village.  The blacks were returning.

With daylight their courage would be equal to the demands of a charge
upon the handful of beasts that had routed them from their rightful
abodes.  The result of the encounter seemed foregone if the savages
could curb their superstitious terror, for against their overwhelming
numbers, their long spears and poisoned arrows, the panther and the
apes could not be expected to survive a really determined attack.

That the blacks were preparing for a charge became apparent a few
moments later, when they commenced to show themselves in force upon the
edge of the clearing, dancing and jumping about as they waved their
spears and shouted taunts and fierce warcries toward the village.

These manoeuvres Tarzan knew would continue until the blacks had worked
themselves into a state of hysterical courage sufficient to sustain
them for a short charge toward the village, and even though he doubted
that they would reach it at the first attempt, he believed that at the
second or the third they would swarm through the gateway, when the
outcome could not be aught than the extermination of Tarzan's bold, but
unarmed and undisciplined, defenders.

Even as he had guessed, the first charge carried the howling warriors
but a short distance into the open--a shrill, weird challenge from the
ape-man being all that was necessary to send them scurrying back to the
bush.  For half an hour they pranced and yelled their courage to the
sticking-point, and again essayed a charge.

This time they came quite to the village gate, but when Sheeta and the
hideous apes leaped among them they turned screaming in terror, and
again fled to the jungle.

Again was the dancing and shouting repeated.  This time Tarzan felt no
doubt they would enter the village and complete the work that a handful
of determined white men would have carried to a successful conclusion
at the first attempt.

To have rescue come so close only to be thwarted because he could not
make his poor, savage friends understand precisely what he wanted of
them was most irritating, but he could not find it in his heart to
place blame upon them.   They had done their best, and now he was sure
they would doubtless remain to die with him in a fruitless effort to
defend him.

The blacks were already preparing for the charge.  A few individuals
had advanced a short distance toward the village and were exhorting the
others to follow them.  In a moment the whole savage horde would be
racing across the clearing.

Tarzan thought only of the little child somewhere in this cruel,
relentless wilderness.  His heart ached for the son that he might no
longer seek to save--that and the realization of Jane's suffering were
all that weighed upon his brave spirit in these that he thought his
last moments of life.  Succour, all that he could hope for, had come to
him in the instant of his extremity--and failed.  There was nothing
further for which to hope.

The blacks were half-way across the clearing when Tarzan's attention
was attracted by the actions of one of the apes.  The beast was glaring
toward one of the huts.  Tarzan followed his gaze.  To his infinite
relief and delight he saw the stalwart form of Mugambi racing toward
him.

The huge black was panting heavily as though from strenuous physical
exertion and nervous excitement.  He rushed to Tarzan's side, and as
the first of the savages reached the village gate the native's knife
severed the last of the cords that bound Tarzan to the stake.

In the street lay the corpses of the savages that had fallen before the
pack the night before.  From one of these Tarzan seized a spear and
knob stick, and with Mugambi at his side and the snarling pack about
him, he met the natives as they poured through the gate.

Fierce and terrible was the battle that ensued, but at last the savages
were routed, more by terror, perhaps, at sight of a black man and a
white fighting in company with a panther and the huge fierce apes of
Akut, than because of their inability to overcome the relatively small
force that opposed them.

One prisoner fell into the hands of Tarzan, and him the ape-man
questioned in an effort to learn what had become of Rokoff and his
party.  Promised his liberty in return for the information, the black
told all he knew concerning the movements of the Russian.

It seemed that early in the morning their chief had attempted to
prevail upon the whites to return with him to the village and with
their guns destroy the ferocious pack that had taken possession of it,
but Rokoff appeared to entertain even more fears of the giant white man
and his strange companions than even the blacks themselves.

Upon no conditions would he consent to returning even within sight of
the village.  Instead, he took his party hurriedly to the river, where
they stole a number of canoes the blacks had hidden there.  The last
that had been seen of them they had been paddling strongly up-stream,
their porters from Kaviri's village wielding the blades.

So once more Tarzan of the Apes with his hideous pack took up his
search for the ape-man's son and the pursuit of his abductor.

For weary days they followed through an almost uninhabited country,
only to learn at last that they were upon the wrong trail.  The little
band had been reduced by three, for three of Akut's apes had fallen in
the fighting at the village.   Now, with Akut, there were five great
apes, and Sheeta was there--and Mugambi and Tarzan.

The ape-man no longer heard rumors even of the three who had preceded
Rokoff--the white man and woman and the child.  Who the man and woman
were he could not guess, but that the child was his was enough to keep
him hot upon the trail.  He was sure that Rokoff would be following
this trio, and so he felt confident that so long as he could keep upon
the Russian's trail he would be winning so much nearer to the time he
might snatch his son from the dangers and horrors that menaced him.

In retracing their way after losing Rokoff's trail Tarzan picked it up
again at a point where the Russian had left the river and taken to the
brush in a northerly direction.  He could only account for this change
on the ground that the child had been carried away from the river by
the two who now had possession of it.

Nowhere along the way, however, could he gain definite information that
might assure him positively that the child was ahead of him.  Not a
single native they questioned had seen or heard of this other party,
though nearly all had had direct experience with the Russian or had
talked with others who had.

It was with difficulty that Tarzan could find means to communicate with
the natives, as the moment their eyes fell upon his companions they
fled precipitately into the bush.  His only alternative was to go ahead
of his pack and waylay an occasional warrior whom he found alone in the
jungle.

One day as he was thus engaged, tracking an unsuspecting savage, he
came upon the fellow in the act of hurling a spear at a wounded white
man who crouched in a clump of bush at the trail's side.  The white was
one whom Tarzan had often seen, and whom he recognized at once.

Deep in his memory was implanted those repulsive features--the
close-set eyes, the shifty expression, the drooping yellow moustache.

Instantly it occurred to the ape-man that this fellow had not been
among those who had accompanied Rokoff at the village where Tarzan had
been a prisoner.  He had seen them all, and this fellow had not been
there.  There could be but one explanation--he it was who had fled
ahead of the Russian with the woman and the child--and the woman had
been Jane Clayton.   He was sure now of the meaning of Rokoff's words.

The ape-man's face went white as he looked upon the pasty, vice-marked
countenance of the Swede.  Across Tarzan's forehead stood out the broad
band of scarlet that marked the scar where, years before, Terkoz had
torn a great strip of the ape-man's scalp from his skull in the fierce
battle in which Tarzan had sustained his fitness to the kingship of the
apes of Kerchak.

The man was his prey--the black should not have him, and with the
thought he leaped upon the warrior, striking down the spear before it
could reach its mark.  The black, whipping out his knife, turned to do
battle with this new enemy, while the Swede, lying in the bush,
witnessed a duel, the like of which he had never dreamed to see--a
half-naked white man battling with a half-naked black, hand to hand
with the crude weapons of primeval man at first, and then with hands
and teeth like the primordial brutes from whose loins their forebears
sprung.

For a time Anderssen did not recognize the white, and when at last it
dawned upon him that he had seen this giant before, his eyes went wide
in surprise that this growling, rending beast could ever have been the
well-groomed English gentleman who had been a prisoner aboard the
Kincaid.

An English nobleman!  He had learned the identity of the Kincaid's
prisoners from Lady Greystoke during their flight up the Ugambi.
Before, in common with the other members of the crew of the steamer, he
had not known who the two might be.

The fight was over.  Tarzan had been compelled to kill his antagonist,
as the fellow would not surrender.

The Swede saw the white man leap to his feet beside the corpse of his
foe, and placing one foot upon the broken neck lift his voice in the
hideous challenge of the victorious bull-ape.

Anderssen shuddered.  Then Tarzan turned toward him.  His face was cold
and cruel, and in the grey eyes the Swede read murder.

"Where is my wife?" growled the ape-man.  "Where is the child?"

Anderssen tried to reply, but a sudden fit of coughing choked him.
There was an arrow entirely through his chest, and as he coughed the
blood from his wounded lung poured suddenly from his mouth and nostrils.

Tarzan stood waiting for the paroxysm to pass.  Like a bronze
image--cold, hard, and relentless--he stood over the helpless man,
waiting to wring such information from him as he needed, and then to
kill.

Presently the coughing and haemorrhage ceased, and again the wounded
man tried to speak.  Tarzan knelt near the faintly moving lips.

"The wife and child!" he repeated.  "Where are they?"

Anderssen pointed up the trail.

"The Russian--he got them," he whispered.

"How did you come here?" continued Tarzan.  "Why are you not with
Rokoff?"

"They catch us," replied Anderssen, in a voice so low that the ape-man
could just distinguish the words.   "They catch us.  Ay fight, but my
men they all run away.   Then they get me when Ay ban vounded.  Rokoff
he say leave me here for the hyenas.  That vas vorse than to kill.   He
tak your vife and kid."

"What were you doing with them--where were you taking them?" asked
Tarzan, and then fiercely, leaping close to the fellow with fierce eyes
blazing with the passion of hate and vengeance that he had with
difficulty controlled, "What harm did you do to my wife or child?
Speak quick before I kill you!  Make your peace with God!  Tell me the
worst, or I will tear you to pieces with my hands and teeth.  You have
seen that I can do it!"

A look of wide-eyed surprise overspread Anderssen's face.

"Why," he whispered, "Ay did not hurt them.  Ay tried to save them from
that Russian.  Your vife was kind to me on the Kincaid, and Ay hear
that little baby cry sometimes.   Ay got a vife an' kid for my own by
Christiania an' Ay couldn't bear for to see them separated an' in
Rokoff's hands any more.   That vas all.  Do Ay look like Ay ban here
to hurt them?" he continued after a pause, pointing to the arrow
protruding from his breast.

There was something in the man's tone and expression that convinced
Tarzan of the truth of his assertions.  More weighty than anything else
was the fact that Anderssen evidently seemed more hurt than frightened.
He knew he was going to die, so Tarzan's threats had little effect upon
him; but it was quite apparent that he wished the Englishman to know
the truth and not to wrong him by harbouring the belief that his words
and manner indicated that he had entertained.

The ape-man instantly dropped to his knees beside the Swede.

"I am sorry," he said very simply.  "I had looked for none but knaves
in company with Rokoff.  I see that I was wrong.   That is past now,
and we will drop it for the more important matter of getting you to a
place of comfort and looking after your wounds.  We must have you on
your feet again as soon as possible."

The Swede, smiling, shook his head.

"You go on an' look for the vife an' kid," he said.   "Ay ban as gude
as dead already; but"--he hesitated--"Ay hate to think of the hyenas.
Von't you finish up this job?"

Tarzan shuddered.  A moment ago he had been upon the point of killing
this man.  Now he could no more have taken his life than he could have
taken the life of any of his best friends.

He lifted the Swede's head in his arms to change and ease his position.

Again came a fit of coughing and the terrible haemorrhage.   After it
was over Anderssen lay with closed eyes.

Tarzan thought that he was dead, until he suddenly raised his eyes to
those of the ape-man, sighed, and spoke--in a very low, weak whisper.

"Ay tank it blow purty soon purty hard!" he said, and died.




Chapter 11

Tambudza


Tarzan scooped a shallow grave for the Kincaid's cook, beneath whose
repulsive exterior had beaten the heart of a chivalrous gentleman.
That was all he could do in the cruel jungle for the man who had given
his life in the service of his little son and his wife.

Then Tarzan took up again the pursuit of Rokoff.  Now that he was
positive that the woman ahead of him was indeed Jane, and that she had
again fallen into the hands of the Russian, it seemed that with all the
incredible speed of his fleet and agile muscles he moved at but a
snail's pace.

It was with difficulty that he kept the trail, for there were many
paths through the jungle at this point--crossing and crisscrossing,
forking and branching in all directions, and over them all had passed
natives innumerable, coming and going.   The spoor of the white men was
obliterated by that of the native carriers who had followed them, and
over all was the spoor of other natives and of wild beasts.

It was most perplexing; yet Tarzan kept on assiduously, checking his
sense of sight against his sense of smell, that he might more surely
keep to the right trail.  But, with all his care, night found him at a
point where he was positive that he was on the wrong trail entirely.

He knew that the pack would follow his spoor, and so he had been
careful to make it as distinct as possible, brushing often against the
vines and creepers that walled the jungle-path, and in other ways
leaving his scent-spoor plainly discernible.

As darkness settled a heavy rain set in, and there was nothing for the
baffled ape-man to do but wait in the partial shelter of a huge tree
until morning; but the coming of dawn brought no cessation of the
torrential downpour.

For a week the sun was obscured by heavy clouds, while violent rain and
wind storms obliterated the last remnants of the spoor Tarzan
constantly though vainly sought.

During all this time he saw no signs of natives, nor of his own pack,
the members of which he feared had lost his trail during the terrific
storm.  As the country was strange to him, he had been unable to judge
his course accurately, since he had had neither sun by day nor moon nor
stars by night to guide him.

When the sun at last broke through the clouds in the fore-noon of the
seventh day, it looked down upon an almost frantic ape-man.

For the first time in his life, Tarzan of the Apes had been lost in the
jungle.  That the experience should have befallen him at such a time
seemed cruel beyond expression.  Somewhere in this savage land his wife
and son lay in the clutches of the arch-fiend Rokoff.

What hideous trials might they not have undergone during those seven
awful days that nature had thwarted him in his endeavours to locate
them?  Tarzan knew the Russian, in whose power they were, so well that
he could not doubt but that the man, filled with rage that Jane had
once escaped him, and knowing that Tarzan might be close upon his
trail, would wreak without further loss of time whatever vengeance his
polluted mind might be able to conceive.

But now that the sun shone once more, the ape-man was still at a loss
as to what direction to take.  He knew that Rokoff had left the river
in pursuit of Anderssen, but whether he would continue inland or return
to the Ugambi was a question.

The ape-man had seen that the river at the point he had left it was
growing narrow and swift, so that he judged that it could not be
navigable even for canoes to any great distance farther toward its
source.  However, if Rokoff had not returned to the river, in what
direction had he proceeded?

From the direction of Anderssen's flight with Jane and the child Tarzan
was convinced that the man had purposed attempting the tremendous feat
of crossing the continent to Zanzibar; but whether Rokoff would dare so
dangerous a journey or not was a question.

Fear might drive him to the attempt now that he knew the manner of
horrible pack that was upon his trail, and that Tarzan of the Apes was
following him to wreak upon him the vengeance that he deserved.

At last the ape-man determined to continue toward the northeast in the
general direction of German East Africa until he came upon natives from
whom he might gain information as to Rokoff's whereabouts.

The second day following the cessation of the rain Tarzan came upon a
native village the inhabitants of which fled into the bush the instant
their eyes fell upon him.  Tarzan, not to be thwarted in any such
manner as this, pursued them, and after a brief chase caught up with a
young warrior.  The fellow was so badly frightened that he was unable
to defend himself, dropping his weapons and falling upon the ground,
wide-eyed and screaming as he gazed on his captor.

It was with considerable difficulty that the ape-man quieted the
fellow's fears sufficiently to obtain a coherent statement from him as
to the cause of his uncalled-for terror.

From him Tarzan learned, by dint of much coaxing, that a party of
whites had passed through the village several days before.  These men
had told them of a terrible white devil that pursued them, warning the
natives against it and the frightful pack of demons that accompanied it.

The black had recognized Tarzan as the white devil from the
descriptions given by the whites and their black servants.   Behind him
he had expected to see a horde of demons disguised as apes and panthers.

In this Tarzan saw the cunning hand of Rokoff.  The Russian was
attempting to make travel as difficult as possible for him by turning
the natives against him in superstitious fear.

The native further told Tarzan that the white man who had led the
recent expedition had promised them a fabulous reward if they would
kill the white devil.  This they had fully intended doing should the
opportunity present itself; but the moment they had seen Tarzan their
blood had turned to water, as the porters of the white men had told
them would be the case.

Finding the ape-man made no attempt to harm him, the native at last
recovered his grasp upon his courage, and, at Tarzan's suggestion,
accompanied the white devil back to the village, calling as he went for
his fellows to return also, as "the white devil has promised to do you
no harm if you come back right away and answer his questions."

One by one the blacks straggled into the village, but that their fears
were not entirely allayed was evident from the amount of white that
showed about the eyes of the majority of them as they cast constant and
apprehensive sidelong glances at the ape-man.

The chief was among the first to return to the village, and as it was
he that Tarzan was most anxious to interview, he lost no time in
entering into a palaver with the black.

The fellow was short and stout, with an unusually low and degraded
countenance and apelike arms.  His whole expression denoted
deceitfulness.

Only the superstitious terror engendered in him by the stories poured
into his ears by the whites and blacks of the Russian's party kept him
from leaping upon Tarzan with his warriors and slaying him forthwith,
for he and his people were inveterate maneaters.  But the fear that he
might indeed be a devil, and that out there in the jungle behind him
his fierce demons waited to do his bidding, kept M'ganwazam from
putting his desires into action.

Tarzan questioned the fellow closely, and by comparing his statements
with those of the young warrior he had first talked with he learned
that Rokoff and his safari were in terror-stricken retreat in the
direction of the far East Coast.

Many of the Russian's porters had already deserted him.   In that very
village he had hanged five for theft and attempted desertion.  Judging,
however, from what the Waganwazam had learned from those of the
Russian's blacks who were not too far gone in terror of the brutal
Rokoff to fear even to speak of their plans, it was apparent that he
would not travel any great distance before the last of his porters,
cooks, tent-boys, gun-bearers, askari, and even his headman, would have
turned back into the bush, leaving him to the mercy of the merciless
jungle.

M'ganwazam denied that there had been any white woman or child with the
party of whites; but even as he spoke Tarzan was convinced that he
lied.  Several times the ape-man approached the subject from different
angles, but never was he successful in surprising the wily cannibal
into a direct contradiction of his original statement that there had
been no women or children with the party.

Tarzan demanded food of the chief, and after considerable haggling on
the part of the monarch succeeded in obtaining a meal.  He then tried
to draw out others of the tribe, especially the young man whom he had
captured in the bush, but M'ganwazam's presence sealed their lips.

At last, convinced that these people knew a great deal more than they
had told him concerning the whereabouts of the Russian and the fate of
Jane and the child, Tarzan determined to remain overnight among them in
the hope of discovering something further of importance.

When he had stated his decision to the chief he was rather surprised to
note the sudden change in the fellow's attitude toward him.  From
apparent dislike and suspicion M'ganwazam became a most eager and
solicitous host.

Nothing would do but that the ape-man should occupy the best hut in the
village, from which M'ganwazam's oldest wife was forthwith summarily
ejected, while the chief took up his temporary abode in the hut of one
of his younger consorts.

Had Tarzan chanced to recall the fact that a princely reward had been
offered the blacks if they should succeed in killing him, he might have
more quickly interpreted M'ganwazam's sudden change in front.

To have the white giant sleeping peacefully in one of his own huts
would greatly facilitate the matter of earning the reward, and so the
chief was urgent in his suggestions that Tarzan, doubtless being very
much fatigued after his travels, should retire early to the comforts of
the anything but inviting palace.

As much as the ape-man detested the thought of sleeping within a native
hut, he had determined to do so this night, on the chance that he might
be able to induce one of the younger men to sit and chat with him
before the fire that burned in the centre of the smoke-filled dwelling,
and from him draw the truths he sought.  So Tarzan accepted the
invitation of old M'ganwazam, insisting, however, that he much
preferred sharing a hut with some of the younger men rather than
driving the chief's old wife out in the cold.

The toothless old hag grinned her appreciation of this suggestion, and
as the plan still better suited the chief's scheme, in that it would
permit him to surround Tarzan with a gang of picked assassins, he
readily assented, so that presently Tarzan had been installed in a hut
close to the village gate.

As there was to be a dance that night in honour of a band of recently
returned hunters, Tarzan was left alone in the hut, the young men, as
M'ganwazam explained, having to take part in the festivities.

As soon as the ape-man was safely installed in the trap, M'Ganwazam
called about him the young warriors whom he had selected to spend the
night with the white devil!

None of them was overly enthusiastic about the plan, since deep in
their superstitious hearts lay an exaggerated fear of the strange white
giant; but the word of M'ganwazam was law among his people, so not one
dared refuse the duty he was called upon to perform.

As M'ganwazam unfolded his plan in whispers to the savages squatting
about him the old, toothless hag, to whom Tarzan had saved her hut for
the night, hovered about the conspirators ostensibly to replenish the
supply of firewood for the blaze about which the men sat, but really to
drink in as much of their conversation as possible.

Tarzan had slept for perhaps an hour or two despite the savage din of
the revellers when his keen senses came suddenly alert to a
suspiciously stealthy movement in the hut in which he lay.  The fire
had died down to a little heap of glowing embers, which accentuated
rather than relieved the darkness that shrouded the interior of the
evil-smelling dwelling, yet the trained senses of the ape-man warned
him of another presence creeping almost silently toward him through the
gloom.

He doubted that it was one of his hut mates returning from the
festivities, for he still heard the wild cries of the dancers and the
din of the tom-toms in the village street without.   Who could it be
that took such pains to conceal his approach?

As the presence came within reach of him the ape-man bounded lightly to
the opposite side of the hut, his spear poised ready at his side.

"Who is it," he asked, "that creeps upon Tarzan of the Apes, like a
hungry lion out of the darkness?"

"Silence, bwana!" replied an old cracked voice.  "It is Tambudza--she
whose hut you would not take, and thus drive an old woman out into the
cold night."

"What does Tambudza want of Tarzan of the Apes?" asked the ape-man.

"You were kind to me to whom none is now kind, and I have come to warn
you in payment of your kindness," answered the old hag.

"Warn me of what?"

"M'ganwazam has chosen the young men who are to sleep in the hut with
you," replied Tambudza.  "I was near as he talked with them, and heard
him issuing his instructions to them.   When the dance is run well into
the morning they are to come to the hut.

"If you are awake they are to pretend that they have come to sleep, but
if you sleep it is M'ganwazam's command that you be killed.  If you are
not then asleep they will wait quietly beside you until you do sleep,
and then they will all fall upon you together and slay you.  M'ganwazam
is determined to win the reward the white man has offered."

"I had forgotten the reward," said Tarzan, half to himself, and then he
added, "How may M'ganwazam hope to collect the reward now that the
white men who are my enemies have left his country and gone he knows
not where?"

"Oh, they have not gone far," replied Tambudza.   "M'ganwazam knows
where they camp.  His runners could quickly overtake them--they move
slowly."

"Where are they?" asked Tarzan.

"Do you wish to come to them?" asked Tambudza in way of reply.

Tarzan nodded.

"I cannot tell you where they lie so that you could come to the place
yourself, but I could lead you to them, bwana."

In their interest in the conversation neither of the speakers had
noticed the little figure which crept into the darkness of the hut
behind them, nor did they see it when it slunk noiselessly out again.

It was little Buulaoo, the chief's son by one of his younger wives--a
vindictive, degenerate little rascal who hated Tambudza, and was ever
seeking opportunities to spy upon her and report her slightest breach
of custom to his father.

"Come, then," said Tarzan quickly, "let us be on our way."

This Buulaoo did not hear, for he was already legging it up the village
street to where his hideous sire guzzled native beer, and watched the
evolutions of the frantic dancers leaping high in the air and cavorting
wildly in their hysterical capers.

So it happened that as Tarzan and Tambudza sneaked warily from the
village and melted into the Stygian darkness of the jungle two lithe
runners took their way in the same direction, though by another trail.

When they had come sufficiently far from the village to make it safe
for them to speak above a whisper, Tarzan asked the old woman if she
had seen aught of a white woman and a little child.

"Yes, bwana," replied Tambudza, "there was a woman with them and a
little child--a little white piccaninny.   It died here in our village
of the fever and they buried it!"




Chapter 12

A Black Scoundrel


When Jane Clayton regained consciousness she saw Anderssen standing
over her, holding the baby in his arms.  As her eyes rested upon them
an expression of misery and horror overspread her countenance.

"What is the matter?" he asked.  "You ban sick?"

"Where is my baby?" she cried, ignoring his questions.

Anderssen held out the chubby infant, but she shook her head.

"It is not mine," she said.  "You knew that it was not mine.   You are
a devil like the Russian."

Anderssen's blue eyes stretched in surprise.

"Not yours!" he exclaimed.  "You tole me the kid aboard the Kincaid ban
your kid."

"Not this one," replied Jane dully.  "The other.  Where is the other?
There must have been two.  I did not know about this one."

"There vasn't no other kid.  Ay tank this ban yours.  Ay am very sorry."

Anderssen fidgeted about, standing first on one foot and then upon the
other.  It was perfectly evident to Jane that he was honest in his
protestations of ignorance of the true identity of the child.

Presently the baby commenced to crow, and bounce up and down in the
Swede's arms, at the same time leaning forward with little hands
out-reaching toward the young woman.

She could not withstand the appeal, and with a low cry she sprang to
her feet and gathered the baby to her breast.

For a few minutes she wept silently, her face buried in the baby's
soiled little dress.  The first shock of disappointment that the tiny
thing had not been her beloved Jack was giving way to a great hope that
after all some miracle had occurred to snatch her baby from Rokoff's
hands at the last instant before the Kincaid sailed from England.

Then, too, there was the mute appeal of this wee waif alone and unloved
in the midst of the horrors of the savage jungle.   It was this thought
more than any other that had sent her mother's heart out to the
innocent babe, while still she suffered from disappointment that she
had been deceived in its identity.

"Have you no idea whose child this is?" she asked Anderssen.

The man shook his head.

"Not now," he said.  "If he ain't ban your kid, Ay don' know whose kid
he do ban.  Rokoff said it was yours.  Ay tank he tank so, too.

"What do we do with it now?  Ay can't go back to the Kincaid.   Rokoff
would have me shot; but you can go back.  Ay take you to the sea, and
then some of these black men they take you to the ship--eh?"

"No! no!" cried Jane.  "Not for the world.  I would rather die than
fall into the hands of that man again.  No, let us go on and take this
poor little creature with us.  If God is willing we shall be saved in
one way or another."

So they again took up their flight through the wilderness, taking with
them a half-dozen of the Mosulas to carry provisions and the tents that
Anderssen had smuggled aboard the small boat in preparation for the
attempted escape.

The days and nights of torture that the young woman suffered were so
merged into one long, unbroken nightmare of hideousness that she soon
lost all track of time.  Whether they had been wandering for days or
years she could not tell.   The one bright spot in that eternity of
fear and suffering was the little child whose tiny hands had long since
fastened their softly groping fingers firmly about her heart.

In a way the little thing took the place and filled the aching void
that the theft of her own baby had left.  It could never be the same,
of course, but yet, day by day, she found her mother-love, enveloping
the waif more closely until she sometimes sat with closed eyes lost in
the sweet imagining that the little bundle of humanity at her breast
was truly her own.

For some time their progress inland was extremely slow.   Word came to
them from time to time through natives passing from the coast on
hunting excursions that Rokoff had not yet guessed the direction of
their flight.  This, and the desire to make the journey as light as
possible for the gently bred woman, kept Anderssen to a slow advance of
short and easy marches with many rests.

The Swede insisted upon carrying the child while they travelled, and in
countless other ways did what he could to help Jane Clayton conserve
her strength.  He had been terribly chagrined on discovering the
mistake he had made in the identity of the baby, but once the young
woman became convinced that his motives were truly chivalrous she would
not permit him longer to upbraid himself for the error that he could
not by any means have avoided.

At the close of each day's march Anderssen saw to the erection of a
comfortable shelter for Jane and the child.   Her tent was always
pitched in the most favourable location.   The thorn boma round it was
the strongest and most impregnable that the Mosula could construct.

Her food was the best that their limited stores and the rifle of the
Swede could provide, but the thing that touched her heart the closest
was the gentle consideration and courtesy which the man always accorded
her.

That such nobility of character could lie beneath so repulsive an
exterior never ceased to be a source of wonder and amazement to her,
until at last the innate chivalry of the man, and his unfailing
kindliness and sympathy transformed his appearance in so far as Jane
was concerned until she saw only the sweetness of his character
mirrored in his countenance.

They had commenced to make a little better progress when word reached
them that Rokoff was but a few marches behind them, and that he had at
last discovered the direction of their flight.  It was then that
Anderssen took to the river, purchasing a canoe from a chief whose
village lay a short distance from the Ugambi upon the bank of a
tributary.

Thereafter the little party of fugitives fled up the broad Ugambi, and
so rapid had their flight become that they no longer received word of
their pursuers.  At the end of canoe navigation upon the river, they
abandoned their canoe and took to the jungle.  Here progress became at
once arduous, slow, and dangerous.

The second day after leaving the Ugambi the baby fell ill with fever.
Anderssen knew what the outcome must be, but he had not the heart to
tell Jane Clayton the truth, for he had seen that the young woman had
come to love the child almost as passionately as though it had been her
own flesh and blood.

As the baby's condition precluded farther advance, Anderssen withdrew a
little from the main trail he had been following and built a camp in a
natural clearing on the bank of a little river.

Here Jane devoted her every moment to caring for the tiny sufferer, and
as though her sorrow and anxiety were not all that she could bear, a
further blow came with the sudden announcement of one of the Mosula
porters who had been foraging in the jungle adjacent that Rokoff and
his party were camped quite close to them, and were evidently upon
their trail to this little nook which all had thought so excellent a
hiding-place.

This information could mean but one thing, and that they must break
camp and fly onward regardless of the baby's condition.   Jane Clayton
knew the traits of the Russian well enough to be positive that he would
separate her from the child the moment that he recaptured them, and she
knew that separation would mean the immediate death of the baby.

As they stumbled forward through the tangled vegetation along an old
and almost overgrown game trail the Mosula porters deserted them one by
one.

The men had been staunch enough in their devotion and loyalty as long
as they were in no danger of being overtaken by the Russian and his
party.  They had heard, however, so much of the atrocious disposition
of Rokoff that they had grown to hold him in mortal terror, and now
that they knew he was close upon them their timid hearts would fortify
them no longer, and as quickly as possible they deserted the three
whites.

Yet on and on went Anderssen and the girl.  The Swede went ahead, to
hew a way through the brush where the path was entirely overgrown, so
that on this march it was necessary that the young woman carry the
child.

All day they marched.  Late in the afternoon they realized that they
had failed.  Close behind them they heard the noise of a large safari
advancing along the trail which they had cleared for their pursuers.

When it became quite evident that they must be overtaken in a short
time Anderssen hid Jane behind a large tree, covering her and the child
with brush.

"There is a village about a mile farther on," he said to her.   "The
Mosula told me its location before they deserted us.   Ay try to lead
the Russian off your trail, then you go on to the village.  Ay tank the
chief ban friendly to white men--the Mosula tal me he ban.  Anyhow,
that was all we can do.

"After while you get chief to tak you down by the Mosula village at the
sea again, an' after a while a ship is sure to put into the mouth of
the Ugambi.  Then you be all right.  Gude-by an' gude luck to you,
lady!"

"But where are you going, Sven?" asked Jane.  "Why can't you hide here
and go back to the sea with me?"

"Ay gotta tal the Russian you ban dead, so that he don't luke for you
no more," and Anderssen grinned.

"Why can't you join me then after you have told him that?" insisted the
girl.

Anderssen shook his head.

"Ay don't tank Ay join anybody any more after Ay tal the Russian you
ban dead," he said.

"You don't mean that you think he will kill you?" asked Jane, and yet
in her heart she knew that that was exactly what the great scoundrel
would do in revenge for his having been thwarted by the Swede.
Anderssen did not reply, other than to warn her to silence and point
toward the path along which they had just come.

"I don't care," whispered Jane Clayton.  "I shall not let you die to
save me if I can prevent it in any way.  Give me your revolver.  I can
use that, and together we may be able to hold them off until we can
find some means of escape."

"It won't work, lady," replied Anderssen.  "They would only get us
both, and then Ay couldn't do you no good at all.   Think of the kid,
lady, and what it would be for you both to fall into Rokoff's hands
again.  For his sake you must do what Ay say.  Here, take my rifle and
ammunition; you may need them."

He shoved the gun and bandoleer into the shelter beside Jane.   Then he
was gone.

She watched him as he returned along the path to meet the oncoming
safari of the Russian.  Soon a turn in the trail hid him from view.

Her first impulse was to follow.  With the rifle she might be of
assistance to him, and, further, she could not bear the terrible
thought of being left alone at the mercy of the fearful jungle without
a single friend to aid her.

She started to crawl from her shelter with the intention of running
after Anderssen as fast as she could.  As she drew the baby close to
her she glanced down into its little face.

How red it was!  How unnatural the little thing looked.   She raised
the cheek to hers.  It was fiery hot with fever!

With a little gasp of terror Jane Clayton rose to her feet in the
jungle path.  The rifle and bandoleer lay forgotten in the shelter
beside her.  Anderssen was forgotten, and Rokoff, and her great peril.

All that rioted through her fear-mad brain was the fearful fact that
this little, helpless child was stricken with the terrible
jungle-fever, and that she was helpless to do aught to allay its
sufferings--sufferings that were sure to come during ensuing
intervals of partial consciousness.

Her one thought was to find some one who could help her--some woman who
had had children of her own--and with the thought came recollection of
the friendly village of which Anderssen had spoken.  If she could but
reach it--in time!

There was no time to be lost.  Like a startled antelope she turned and
fled up the trail in the direction Anderssen had indicated.

From far behind came the sudden shouting of men, the sound of shots,
and then silence.  She knew that Anderssen had met the Russian.

A half-hour later she stumbled, exhausted, into a little thatched
village.  Instantly she was surrounded by men, women, and children.
Eager, curious, excited natives plied her with a hundred questions, no
one of which she could understand or answer.

All that she could do was to point tearfully at the baby, now wailing
piteously in her arms, and repeat over and over, "Fever--fever--fever."

The blacks did not understand her words, but they saw the cause of her
trouble, and soon a young woman had pulled her into a hut and with
several others was doing her poor best to quiet the child and allay its
agony.

The witch doctor came and built a little fire before the infant, upon
which he boiled some strange concoction in a small earthen pot, making
weird passes above it and mumbling strange, monotonous chants.
Presently he dipped a zebra's tail into the brew, and with further
mutterings and incantations sprinkled a few drops of the liquid over
the baby's face.

After he had gone the women sat about and moaned and wailed until Jane
thought that she should go mad; but, knowing that they were doing it
all out of the kindness of their hearts, she endured the frightful
waking nightmare of those awful hours in dumb and patient suffering.

It must have been well toward midnight that she became conscious of a
sudden commotion in the village.  She heard the voices of the natives
raised in controversy, but she could not understand the words.

Presently she heard footsteps approaching the hut in which she squatted
before a bright fire with the baby on her lap.   The little thing lay
very still now, its lids, half-raised, showed the pupils horribly
upturned.

Jane Clayton looked into the little face with fear-haunted eyes.  It
was not her baby--not her flesh and blood--but how close, how dear the
tiny, helpless thing had become to her.   Her heart, bereft of its own,
had gone out to this poor, little, nameless waif, and lavished upon it
all the love that had been denied her during the long, bitter weeks of
her captivity aboard the Kincaid.

She saw that the end was near, and though she was terrified at
contemplation of her loss, still she hoped that it would come quickly
now and end the sufferings of the little victim.

The footsteps she had heard without the hut now halted before the door.
There was a whispered colloquy, and a moment later M'ganwazam, chief of
the tribe, entered.  She had seen but little of him, as the women had
taken her in hand almost as soon as she had entered the village.

M'ganwazam, she now saw, was an evil-appearing savage with every mark
of brutal degeneracy writ large upon his bestial countenance.  To Jane
Clayton he looked more gorilla than human.  He tried to converse with
her, but without success, and finally he called to some one without.

In answer to his summons another Negro entered--a man of very different
appearance from M'ganwazam--so different, in fact, that Jane Clayton
immediately decided that he was of another tribe.  This man acted as
interpreter, and almost from the first question that M'ganwazam put to
her, Jane felt an intuitive conviction that the savage was attempting
to draw information from her for some ulterior motive.

She thought it strange that the fellow should so suddenly have become
interested in her plans, and especially in her intended destination
when her journey had been interrupted at his village.

Seeing no reason for withholding the information, she told him the
truth; but when he asked if she expected to meet her husband at the end
of the trip, she shook her head negatively.

Then he told her the purpose of his visit, talking through the
interpreter.

"I have just learned," he said, "from some men who live by the side of
the great water, that your husband followed you up the Ugambi for
several marches, when he was at last set upon by natives and killed.
Therefore I have told you this that you might not waste your time in a
long journey if you expected to meet your husband at the end of it; but
instead could turn and retrace your steps to the coast."

Jane thanked M'ganwazam for his kindness, though her heart was numb
with suffering at this new blow.  She who had suffered so much was at
last beyond reach of the keenest of misery's pangs, for her senses were
numbed and calloused.

With bowed head she sat staring with unseeing eyes upon the face of the
baby in her lap.  M'ganwazam had left the hut.   Sometime later she
heard a noise at the entrance--another had entered.  One of the women
sitting opposite her threw a faggot upon the dying embers of the fire
between them.

With a sudden flare it burst into renewed flame, lighting up the hut's
interior as though by magic.

The flame disclosed to Jane Clayton's horrified gaze that the baby was
quite dead.  How long it had been so she could not guess.

A choking lump rose to her throat, her head drooped in silent misery
upon the little bundle that she had caught suddenly to her breast.

For a moment the silence of the hut was unbroken.  Then the native
woman broke into a hideous wail.

A man coughed close before Jane Clayton and spoke her name.

With a start she raised her eyes to look into the sardonic countenance
of Nikolas Rokoff.




Chapter 13

Escape


For a moment Rokoff stood sneering down upon Jane Clayton, then his
eyes fell to the little bundle in her lap.  Jane had drawn one corner
of the blanket over the child's face, so that to one who did not know
the truth it seemed but to be sleeping.

"You have gone to a great deal of unnecessary trouble," said Rokoff,
"to bring the child to this village.  If you had attended to your own
affairs I should have brought it here myself.

"You would have been spared the dangers and fatigue of the journey.
But I suppose I must thank you for relieving me of the inconvenience of
having to care for a young infant on the march.

"This is the village to which the child was destined from the first.
M'ganwazam will rear him carefully, making a good cannibal of him, and
if you ever chance to return to civilization it will doubtless afford
you much food for thought as you compare the luxuries and comforts of
your life with the details of the life your son is living in the
village of the Waganwazam.

"Again I thank you for bringing him here for me, and now I must ask you
to surrender him to me, that I may turn him over to his foster
parents." As he concluded Rokoff held out his hands for the child, a
nasty grin of vindictiveness upon his lips.

To his surprise Jane Clayton rose and, without a word of protest, laid
the little bundle in his arms.

"Here is the child," she said.  "Thank God he is beyond your power to
harm."

Grasping the import of her words, Rokoff snatched the blanket from the
child's face to seek confirmation of his fears.   Jane Clayton watched
his expression closely.

She had been puzzled for days for an answer to the question of Rokoff's
knowledge of the child's identity.  If she had been in doubt before the
last shred of that doubt was wiped away as she witnessed the terrible
anger of the Russian as he looked upon the dead face of the baby and
realized that at the last moment his dearest wish for vengeance had
been thwarted by a higher power.

Almost throwing the body of the child back into Jane Clayton's arms,
Rokoff stamped up and down the hut, pounding the air with his clenched
fists and cursing terribly.  At last he halted in front of the young
woman, bringing his face down close to hers.

"You are laughing at me," he shrieked.  "You think that you have beaten
me--eh?  I'll show you, as I have shown the miserable ape you call
'husband,' what it means to interfere with the plans of Nikolas Rokoff.

"You have robbed me of the child.  I cannot make him the son of a
cannibal chief, but"--and he paused as though to let the full meaning
of his threat sink deep--"I can make the mother the wife of a cannibal,
and that I shall do--after I have finished with her myself."

If he had thought to wring from Jane Clayton any sign of terror he
failed miserably.  She was beyond that.  Her brain and nerves were numb
to suffering and shock.

To his surprise a faint, almost happy smile touched her lips.   She was
thinking with thankful heart that this poor little corpse was not that
of her own wee Jack, and that--best of all--Rokoff evidently did not
know the truth.

She would have liked to have flaunted the fact in his face, but she
dared not.  If he continued to believe that the child had been hers, so
much safer would be the real Jack wherever he might be.  She had, of
course, no knowledge of the whereabouts of her little son--she did not
know, even, that he still lived, and yet there was the chance that he
might.

It was more than possible that without Rokoff's knowledge this child
had been substituted for hers by one of the Russian's confederates, and
that even now her son might be safe with friends in London, where there
were many, both able and willing, to have paid any ransom which the
traitorous conspirator might have asked for the safe release of Lord
Greystoke's son.

She had thought it all out a hundred times since she had discovered
that the baby which Anderssen had placed in her arms that night upon
the Kincaid was not her own, and it had been a constant and gnawing
source of happiness to her to dream the whole fantasy through in its
every detail.

No, the Russian must never know that this was not her baby.   She
realized that her position was hopeless--with Anderssen and her husband
dead there was no one in all the world with a desire to succour her who
knew where she might be found.

Rokoff's threat, she realized, was no idle one.  That he would do, or
attempt to do, all that he had promised, she was perfectly sure; but at
the worst it meant but a little earlier release from the hideous
anguish that she had been enduring.   She must find some way to take
her own life before the Russian could harm her further.

Just now she wanted time--time to think and prepare herself for the
end.  She felt that she could not take the last, awful step until she
had exhausted every possibility of escape.   She did not care to live
unless she might find her way back to her own child, but slight as such
a hope appeared she would not admit its impossibility until the last
moment had come, and she faced the fearful reality of choosing between
the final alternatives--Nikolas Rokoff on one hand and self-destruction
upon the other.

"Go away!" she said to the Russian.  "Go away and leave me in peace
with my dead.  Have you not brought sufficient misery and anguish upon
me without attempting to harm me further?  What wrong have I ever done
you that you should persist in persecuting me?"

"You are suffering for the sins of the monkey you chose when you might
have had the love of a gentleman--of Nikolas Rokoff," he replied.  "But
where is the use in discussing the matter?  We shall bury the child
here, and you will return with me at once to my own camp.  Tomorrow I
shall bring you back and turn you over to your new husband--the lovely
M'ganwazam.  Come!"

He reached out for the child.  Jane, who was on her feet now, turned
away from him.

"I shall bury the body," she said.  "Send some men to dig a grave
outside the village."

Rokoff was anxious to have the thing over and get back to his camp with
his victim.  He thought he saw in her apathy a resignation to her fate.
Stepping outside the hut, he motioned her to follow him, and a moment
later, with his men, he escorted Jane beyond the village, where beneath
a great tree the blacks scooped a shallow grave.

Wrapping the tiny body in a blanket, Jane laid it tenderly in the black
hole, and, turning her head that she might not see the mouldy earth
falling upon the pitiful little bundle, she breathed a prayer beside
the grave of the nameless waif that had won its way to the innermost
recesses of her heart.

Then, dry-eyed but suffering, she rose and followed the Russian through
the Stygian blackness of the jungle, along the winding, leafy corridor
that led from the village of M'ganwazam, the black cannibal, to the
camp of Nikolas Rokoff, the white fiend.

Beside them, in the impenetrable thickets that fringed the path, rising
to arch above it and shut out the moon, the girl could hear the
stealthy, muffled footfalls of great beasts, and ever round about them
rose the deafening roars of hunting lions, until the earth trembled to
the mighty sound.

The porters lighted torches now and waved them upon either hand to
frighten off the beasts of prey.  Rokoff urged them to greater speed,
and from the quavering note in his voice Jane Clayton knew that he was
weak from terror.

The sounds of the jungle night recalled most vividly the days and
nights that she had spent in a similar jungle with her forest god--with
the fearless and unconquerable Tarzan of the Apes.  Then there had been
no thoughts of terror, though the jungle noises were new to her, and
the roar of a lion had seemed the most awe-inspiring sound upon the
great earth.

How different would it be now if she knew that he was somewhere there
in the wilderness, seeking her!  Then, indeed, would there be that for
which to live, and every reason to believe that succour was close at
hand--but he was dead!  It was incredible that it should be so.

There seemed no place in death for that great body and those mighty
thews.  Had Rokoff been the one to tell her of her lord's passing she
would have known that he lied.   There could be no reason, she thought,
why M'ganwazam should have deceived her.  She did not know that the
Russian had talked with the savage a few minutes before the chief had
come to her with his tale.

At last they reached the rude boma that Rokoff's porters had thrown up
round the Russian's camp.  Here they found all in turmoil.  She did not
know what it was all about, but she saw that Rokoff was very angry, and
from bits of conversation which she could translate she gleaned that
there had been further desertions while he had been absent, and that
the deserters had taken the bulk of his food and ammunition.

When he had done venting his rage upon those who remained he returned
to where Jane stood under guard of a couple of his white sailors.  He
grasped her roughly by the arm and started to drag her toward his tent.
The girl struggled and fought to free herself, while the two sailors
stood by, laughing at the rare treat.

Rokoff did not hesitate to use rough methods when he found that he was
to have difficulty in carrying out his designs.   Repeatedly he struck
Jane Clayton in the face, until at last, half-conscious, she was
dragged within his tent.

Rokoff's boy had lighted the Russian's lamp, and now at a word from his
master he made himself scarce.  Jane had sunk to the floor in the
middle of the enclosure.  Slowly her numbed senses were returning to
her and she was commencing to think very fast indeed.  Quickly her eyes
ran round the interior of the tent, taking in every detail of its
equipment and contents.

Now the Russian was lifting her to her feet and attempting to drag her
to the camp cot that stood at one side of the tent.   At his belt hung
a heavy revolver.  Jane Clayton's eyes riveted themselves upon it.  Her
palm itched to grasp the huge butt.   She feigned again to swoon, but
through her half-closed lids she waited her opportunity.

It came just as Rokoff was lifting her upon the cot.  A noise at the
tent door behind him brought his head quickly about and away from the
girl.  The butt of the gun was not an inch from her hand.  With a
single, lightning-like move she snatched the weapon from its holster,
and at the same instant Rokoff turned back toward her, realizing his
peril.

She did not dare fire for fear the shot would bring his people about
him, and with Rokoff dead she would fall into hands no better than his
and to a fate probably even worse than he alone could have imagined.
The memory of the two brutes who stood and laughed as Rokoff struck her
was still vivid.

As the rage and fear-filled countenance of the Slav turned toward her
Jane Clayton raised the heavy revolver high above the pasty face and
with all her strength dealt the man a terrific blow between the eyes.

Without a sound he sank, limp and unconscious, to the ground.   A
moment later the girl stood beside him--for a moment at least free from
the menace of his lust.

Outside the tent she again heard the noise that had distracted Rokoff's
attention.  What it was she did not know, but, fearing the return of
the servant and the discovery of her deed, she stepped quickly to the
camp table upon which burned the oil lamp and extinguished the smudgy,
evil-smelling flame.

In the total darkness of the interior she paused for a moment to
collect her wits and plan for the next step in her venture for freedom.

About her was a camp of enemies.  Beyond these foes a black wilderness
of savage jungle peopled by hideous beasts of prey and still more
hideous human beasts.

There was little or no chance that she could survive even a few days of
the constant dangers that would confront her there; but the knowledge
that she had already passed through so many perils unscathed, and that
somewhere out in the faraway world a little child was doubtless at that
very moment crying for her, filled her with determination to make the
effort to accomplish the seemingly impossible and cross that awful land
of horror in search of the sea and the remote chance of succour she
might find there.

Rokoff's tent stood almost exactly in the centre of the boma.
Surrounding it were the tents and shelters of his white companions and
the natives of his safari.  To pass through these and find egress
through the boma seemed a task too fraught with insurmountable
obstacles to warrant even the slightest consideration, and yet there
was no other way.

To remain in the tent until she should be discovered would be to set at
naught all that she had risked to gain her freedom, and so with
stealthy step and every sense alert she approached the back of the tent
to set out upon the first stage of her adventure.

Groping along the rear of the canvas wall, she found that there was no
opening there.  Quickly she returned to the side of the unconscious
Russian.  In his belt her groping fingers came upon the hilt of a long
hunting-knife, and with this she cut a hole in the back wall of the
tent.

Silently she stepped without.  To her immense relief she saw that the
camp was apparently asleep.  In the dim and flickering light of the
dying fires she saw but a single sentry, and he was dozing upon his
haunches at the opposite side of the enclosure.

Keeping the tent between him and herself, she crossed between the small
shelters of the native porters to the boma wall beyond.

Outside, in the darkness of the tangled jungle, she could hear the
roaring of lions, the laughing of hyenas, and the countless, nameless
noises of the midnight jungle.

For a moment she hesitated, trembling.  The thought of the prowling
beasts out there in the darkness was appalling.   Then, with a sudden
brave toss of her head, she attacked the thorny boma wall with her
delicate hands.  Torn and bleeding though they were, she worked on
breathlessly until she had made an opening through which she could worm
her body, and at last she stood outside the enclosure.

Behind her lay a fate worse than death, at the hands of human beings.

Before her lay an almost certain fate--but it was only death--sudden,
merciful, and honourable death.

Without a tremor and without regret she darted away from the camp, and
a moment later the mysterious jungle had closed about her.




Chapter 14

Alone in the Jungle


Tambudza, leading Tarzan of the Apes toward the camp of the Russian,
moved very slowly along the winding jungle path, for she was old and
her legs stiff with rheumatism.

So it was that the runners dispatched by M'ganwazam to warn Rokoff that
the white giant was in his village and that he would be slain that
night reached the Russian's camp before Tarzan and his ancient guide
had covered half the distance.

The guides found the white man's camp in a turmoil.   Rokoff had that
morning been discovered stunned and bleeding within his tent.  When he
had recovered his senses and realized that Jane Clayton had escaped,
his rage was boundless.

Rushing about the camp with his rifle, he had sought to shoot down the
native sentries who had allowed the young woman to elude their
vigilance, but several of the other whites, realizing that they were
already in a precarious position owing to the numerous desertions that
Rokoff's cruelty had brought about, seized and disarmed him.

Then came the messengers from M'ganwazam, but scarce had they told
their story and Rokoff was preparing to depart with them for their
village when other runners, panting from the exertions of their swift
flight through the jungle, rushed breathless into the firelight, crying
that the great white giant had escaped from M'ganwazam and was already
on his way to wreak vengeance against his enemies.

Instantly confusion reigned within the encircling boma.  The blacks
belonging to Rokoff's safari were terror-stricken at the thought of the
proximity of the white giant who hunted through the jungle with a
fierce pack of apes and panthers at his heels.

Before the whites realized what had happened the superstitious fears of
the natives had sent them scurrying into the bush--their own carriers
as well as the messengers from M'ganwazam--but even in their haste they
had not neglected to take with them every article of value upon which
they could lay their hands.

Thus Rokoff and the seven white sailors found themselves deserted and
robbed in the midst of a wilderness.

The Russian, following his usual custom, berated his companions, laying
all the blame upon their shoulders for the events which had led up to
the almost hopeless condition in which they now found themselves; but
the sailors were in no mood to brook his insults and his cursing.

In the midst of this tirade one of them drew a revolver and fired
point-blank at the Russian.  The fellow's aim was poor, but his act so
terrified Rokoff that he turned and fled for his tent.

As he ran his eyes chanced to pass beyond the boma to the edge of the
forest, and there he caught a glimpse of that which sent his craven
heart cold with a fear that almost expunged his terror of the seven men
at his back, who by this time were all firing in hate and revenge at
his retreating figure.

What he saw was the giant figure of an almost naked white man emerging
from the bush.

Darting into his tent, the Russian did not halt in his flight, but kept
right on through the rear wall, taking advantage of the long slit that
Jane Clayton had made the night before.

The terror-stricken Muscovite scurried like a hunted rabbit through the
hole that still gaped in the boma's wall at the point where his own
prey had escaped, and as Tarzan approached the camp upon the opposite
side Rokoff disappeared into the jungle in the wake of Jane Clayton.

As the ape-man entered the boma with old Tambudza at his elbow the
seven sailors, recognizing him, turned and fled in the opposite
direction.  Tarzan saw that Rokoff was not among them, and so he let
them go their way--his business was with the Russian, whom he expected
to find in his tent.  As to the sailors, he was sure that the jungle
would exact from them expiation for their villainies, nor, doubtless,
was he wrong, for his were the last white man's eyes to rest upon any
of them.

Finding Rokoff's tent empty, Tarzan was about to set out in search of
the Russian when Tambudza suggested to him that the departure of the
white man could only have resulted from word reaching him from
M'ganwazam that Tarzan was in his village.

"He has doubtless hastened there," argued the old woman.  "If you would
find him let us return at once."

Tarzan himself thought that this would probably prove to be the fact,
so he did not waste time in an endeavour to locate the Russian's trail,
but, instead, set out briskly for the village of M'ganwazam, leaving
Tambudza to plod slowly in his wake.

His one hope was that Jane was still safe and with Rokoff.   If this
was the case, it would be but a matter of an hour or more before he
should be able to wrest her from the Russian.

He knew now that M'ganwazam was treacherous and that he might have to
fight to regain possession of his wife.   He wished that Mugambi,
Sheeta, Akut, and the balance of the pack were with him, for he
realized that single-handed it would be no child's play to bring Jane
safely from the clutches of two such scoundrels as Rokoff and the wily
M'ganwazam.

To his surprise he found no sign of either Rokoff or Jane in the
village, and as he could not trust the word of the chief, he wasted no
time in futile inquiry.  So sudden and unexpected had been his return,
and so quickly had he vanished into the jungle after learning that
those he sought were not among the Waganwazam, that old M'ganwazam had
no time to prevent his going.

Swinging through the trees, he hastened back to the deserted camp he
had so recently left, for here, he knew, was the logical place to take
up the trail of Rokoff and Jane.

Arrived at the boma, he circled carefully about the outside of the
enclosure until, opposite a break in the thorny wall, he came to
indications that something had recently passed into the jungle.  His
acute sense of smell told him that both of those he sought had fled
from the camp in this direction, and a moment later he had taken up the
trail and was following the faint spoor.

Far ahead of him a terror-stricken young woman was slinking along a
narrow game-trail, fearful that the next moment would bring her face to
face with some savage beast or equally savage man.  As she ran on,
hoping against hope that she had hit upon the direction that would lead
her eventually to the great river, she came suddenly upon a familiar
spot.

At one side of the trail, beneath a giant tree, lay a little heap of
loosely piled brush--to her dying day that little spot of jungle would
be indelibly impressed upon her memory.   It was where Anderssen had
hidden her--where he had given up his life in the vain effort to save
her from Rokoff.

At sight of it she recalled the rifle and ammunition that the man had
thrust upon her at the last moment.  Until now she had forgotten them
entirely.  Still clutched in her hand was the revolver she had snatched
from Rokoff's belt, but that could contain at most not over six
cartridges--not enough to furnish her with food and protection both on
the long journey to the sea.

With bated breath she groped beneath the little mound, scarce daring to
hope that the treasure remained where she had left it; but, to her
infinite relief and joy, her hand came at once upon the barrel of the
heavy weapon and then upon the bandoleer of cartridges.

As she threw the latter about her shoulder and felt the weight of the
big game-gun in her hand a sudden sense of security suffused her.  It
was with new hope and a feeling almost of assured success that she
again set forward upon her journey.

That night she slept in the crotch of a tree, as Tarzan had so often
told her that he was accustomed to doing, and early the next morning
was upon her way again.  Late in the afternoon, as she was about to
cross a little clearing, she was startled at the sight of a huge ape
coming from the jungle upon the opposite side.

The wind was blowing directly across the clearing between them, and
Jane lost no time in putting herself downwind from the huge creature.
Then she hid in a clump of heavy bush and watched, holding the rifle
ready for instant use.

To her consternation she saw that the apes were pausing in the centre
of the clearing.  They came together in a little knot, where they stood
looking backward, as though in expectation of the coming of others of
their tribe.   Jane wished that they would go on, for she knew that at
any moment some little, eddying gust of wind might carry her scent down
to their nostrils, and then what would the protection of her rifle
amount to in the face of those gigantic muscles and mighty fangs?

Her eyes moved back and forth between the apes and the edge of the
jungle toward which they were gazing until at last she perceived the
object of their halt and the thing that they awaited.  They were being
stalked.

Of this she was positive, as she saw the lithe, sinewy form of a
panther glide noiselessly from the jungle at the point at which the
apes had emerged but a moment before.

Quickly the beast trotted across the clearing toward the anthropoids.
Jane wondered at their apparent apathy, and a moment later her wonder
turned to amazement as she saw the great cat come quite close to the
apes, who appeared entirely unconcerned by its presence, and, squatting
down in their midst, fell assiduously to the business of preening,
which occupies most of the waking hours of the cat family.

If the young woman was surprised by the sight of these natural enemies
fraternizing, it was with emotions little short of fear for her own
sanity that she presently saw a tall, muscular warrior enter the
clearing and join the group of savage beasts assembled there.

At first sight of the man she had been positive that he would be torn
to pieces, and she had half risen from her shelter, raising her rifle
to her shoulder to do what she could to avert the man's terrible fate.

Now she saw that he seemed actually conversing with the beasts--issuing
orders to them.

Presently the entire company filed on across the clearing and
disappeared in the jungle upon the opposite side.

With a gasp of mingled incredulity and relief Jane Clayton staggered to
her feet and fled on away from the terrible horde that had just passed
her, while a half-mile behind her another individual, following the
same trail as she, lay frozen with terror behind an ant-hill as the
hideous band passed quite close to him.

This one was Rokoff; but he had recognized the members of the awful
aggregation as allies of Tarzan of the Apes.   No sooner, therefore,
had the beasts passed him than he rose and raced through the jungle as
fast as he could go, in order that he might put as much distance as
possible between himself and these frightful beasts.

So it happened that as Jane Clayton came to the bank of the river, down
which she hoped to float to the ocean and eventual rescue, Nikolas
Rokoff was but a short distance in her rear.

Upon the bank the girl saw a great dugout drawn half-way from the water
and tied securely to a near-by tree.

This, she felt, would solve the question of transportation to the sea
could she but launch the huge, unwieldy craft.   Unfastening the rope
that had moored it to the tree, Jane pushed frantically upon the bow of
the heavy canoe, but for all the results that were apparent she might
as well have been attempting to shove the earth out of its orbit.

She was about winded when it occurred to her to try working the dugout
into the stream by loading the stern with ballast and then rocking the
bow back and forth along the bank until the craft eventually worked
itself into the river.

There were no stones or rocks available, but along the shore she found
quantities of driftwood deposited by the river at a slightly higher
stage.  These she gathered and piled far in the stern of the boat,
until at last, to her immense relief, she saw the bow rise gently from
the mud of the bank and the stern drift slowly with the current until
it again lodged a few feet farther down-stream.

Jane found that by running back and forth between the bow and stern she
could alternately raise and lower each end of the boat as she shifted
her weight from one end to the other, with the result that each time
she leaped to the stern the canoe moved a few inches farther into the
river.

As the success of her plan approached more closely to fruition she
became so wrapped in her efforts that she failed to note the figure of
a man standing beneath a huge tree at the edge of the jungle from which
he had just emerged.

He watched her and her labours with a cruel and malicious grin upon his
swarthy countenance.

The boat at last became so nearly free of the retarding mud and of the
bank that Jane felt positive that she could pole it off into deeper
water with one of the paddles which lay in the bottom of the rude
craft.  With this end in view she seized upon one of these implements
and had just plunged it into the river bottom close to the shore when
her eyes happened to rise to the edge of the jungle.

As her gaze fell upon the figure of the man a little cry of terror rose
to her lips.  It was Rokoff.

He was running toward her now and shouting to her to wait or he would
shoot--though as he was entirely unarmed it was difficult to discover just
how he intended making good his threat.

Jane Clayton knew nothing of the various misfortunes that had befallen
the Russian since she had escaped from his tent, so she believed that
his followers must be close at hand.

However, she had no intention of falling again into the man's clutches.
She would rather die at once than that that should happen to her.
Another minute and the boat would be free.

Once in the current of the river she would be beyond Rokoff's power to
stop her, for there was no other boat upon the shore, and no man, and
certainly not the cowardly Rokoff, would dare to attempt to swim the
crocodile-infested water in an effort to overtake her.

Rokoff, on his part, was bent more upon escape than aught else.   He
would gladly have forgone any designs he might have had upon Jane
Clayton would she but permit him to share this means of escape that she
had discovered.  He would promise anything if she would let him come
aboard the dugout, but he did not think that it was necessary to do so.

He saw that he could easily reach the bow of the boat before it cleared
the shore, and then it would not be necessary to make promises of any
sort.  Not that Rokoff would have felt the slightest compunction in
ignoring any promises he might have made the girl, but he disliked the
idea of having to sue for favour with one who had so recently assaulted
and escaped him.

Already he was gloating over the days and nights of revenge that would
be his while the heavy dugout drifted its slow way to the ocean.

Jane Clayton, working furiously to shove the boat beyond his reach,
suddenly realized that she was to be successful, for with a little
lurch the dugout swung quickly into the current, just as the Russian
reached out to place his hand upon its bow.

His fingers did not miss their goal by a half-dozen inches.   The girl
almost collapsed with the reaction from the terrific mental, physical,
and nervous strain under which she had been labouring for the past few
minutes.  But, thank Heaven, at last she was safe!

Even as she breathed a silent prayer of thanksgiving, she saw a sudden
expression of triumph lighten the features of the cursing Russian, and
at the same instant he dropped suddenly to the ground, grasping firmly
upon something which wriggled through the mud toward the water.

Jane Clayton crouched, wide-eyed and horror-stricken, in the bottom of
the boat as she realized that at the last instant success had been
turned to failure, and that she was indeed again in the power of the
malignant Rokoff.

For the thing that the man had seen and grasped was the end of the
trailing rope with which the dugout had been moored to the tree.




Chapter 15

Down the Ugambi


Halfway between the Ugambi and the village of the Waganwazam, Tarzan
came upon the pack moving slowly along his old spoor.   Mugambi could
scarce believe that the trail of the Russian and the mate of his savage
master had passed so close to that of the pack.

It seemed incredible that two human beings should have come so close to
them without having been detected by some of the marvellously keen and
alert beasts; but Tarzan pointed out the spoor of the two he trailed,
and at certain points the black could see that the man and the woman
must have been in hiding as the pack passed them, watching every move
of the ferocious creatures.

It had been apparent to Tarzan from the first that Jane and Rokoff were
not travelling together.  The spoor showed distinctly that the young
woman had been a considerable distance ahead of the Russian at first,
though the farther the ape-man continued along the trail the more
obvious it became that the man was rapidly overhauling his quarry.

At first there had been the spoor of wild beasts over the footprints of
Jane Clayton, while upon the top of all Rokoff's spoor showed that he
had passed over the trail after the animals had left their records upon
the ground.  But later there were fewer and fewer animal imprints
occurring between those of Jane's and the Russian's feet, until as he
approached the river the ape-man became aware that Rokoff could not
have been more than a few hundred yards behind the girl.

He felt they must be close ahead of him now, and, with a little thrill
of expectation, he leaped rapidly forward ahead of the pack.  Swinging
swiftly through the trees, he came out upon the river-bank at the very
point at which Rokoff had overhauled Jane as she endeavoured to launch
the cumbersome dugout.

In the mud along the bank the ape-man saw the footprints of the two he
sought, but there was neither boat nor people there when he arrived,
nor, at first glance, any sign of their whereabouts.

It was plain that they had shoved off a native canoe and embarked upon
the bosom of the stream, and as the ape-man's eye ran swiftly down the
course of the river beneath the shadows of the overarching trees he saw
in the distance, just as it rounded a bend that shut it off from his
view, a drifting dugout in the stern of which was the figure of a man.

Just as the pack came in sight of the river they saw their agile leader
racing down the river's bank, leaping from hummock to hummock of the
swampy ground that spread between them and a little promontory which
rose just where the river curved inward from their sight.

To follow him it was necessary for the heavy, cumbersome apes to make a
wide detour, and Sheeta, too, who hated water.   Mugambi followed after
them as rapidly as he could in the wake of the great white master.

A half-hour of rapid travelling across the swampy neck of land and over
the rising promontory brought Tarzan, by a short cut, to the inward
bend of the winding river, and there before him upon the bosom of the
stream he saw the dugout, and in its stern Nikolas Rokoff.

Jane was not with the Russian.

At sight of his enemy the broad scar upon the ape-man's brow burned
scarlet, and there rose to his lips the hideous, bestial challenge of
the bull-ape.

Rokoff shuddered as the weird and terrible alarm fell upon his ears.
Cowering in the bottom of the boat, his teeth chattering in terror, he
watched the man he feared above all other creatures upon the face of
the earth as he ran quickly to the edge of the water.

Even though the Russian knew that he was safe from his enemy, the very
sight of him threw him into a frenzy of trembling cowardice, which
became frantic hysteria as he saw the white giant dive fearlessly into
the forbidding waters of the tropical river.

With steady, powerful strokes the ape-man forged out into the stream
toward the drifting dugout.  Now Rokoff seized one of the paddles lying
in the bottom of the craft, and, with terrorwide eyes still glued upon
the living death that pursued him, struck out madly in an effort to
augment the speed of the unwieldy canoe.

And from the opposite bank a sinister ripple, unseen by either man,
moved steadily toward the half-naked swimmer.

Tarzan had reached the stern of the craft at last.  One hand
upstretched grasped the gunwale.  Rokoff sat frozen with fear, unable
to move a hand or foot, his eyes riveted upon the face of his Nemesis.

Then a sudden commotion in the water behind the swimmer caught his
attention.  He saw the ripple, and he knew what caused it.

At the same instant Tarzan felt mighty jaws close upon his right leg.
He tried to struggle free and raise himself over the side of the boat.
His efforts would have succeeded had not this unexpected interruption
galvanized the malign brain of the Russian into instant action with its
sudden promise of deliverance and revenge.

Like a venomous snake the man leaped toward the stern of the boat, and
with a single swift blow struck Tarzan across the head with the heavy
paddle.  The ape-man's fingers slipped from their hold upon the gunwale.

There was a short struggle at the surface, and then a swirl of waters,
a little eddy, and a burst of bubbles soon smoothed out by the flowing
current marked for the instant the spot where Tarzan of the Apes, Lord
of the Jungle, disappeared from the sight of men beneath the gloomy
waters of the dark and forbidding Ugambi.

Weak from terror, Rokoff sank shuddering into the bottom of the dugout.
For a moment he could not realize the good fortune that had befallen
him--all that he could see was the figure of a silent, struggling white
man disappearing beneath the surface of the river to unthinkable death
in the slimy mud of the bottom.

Slowly all that it meant to him filtered into the mind of the Russian,
and then a cruel smile of relief and triumph touched his lips; but it
was short-lived, for just as he was congratulating himself that he was
now comparatively safe to proceed upon his way to the coast unmolested,
a mighty pandemonium rose from the river-bank close by.

As his eyes sought the authors of the frightful sound he saw standing
upon the shore, glaring at him with hate-filled eyes, a devil-faced
panther surrounded by the hideous apes of Akut, and in the forefront of
them a giant black warrior who shook his fist at him, threatening him
with terrible death.

The nightmare of that flight down the Ugambi with the hideous horde
racing after him by day and by night, now abreast of him, now lost in
the mazes of the jungle far behind for hours and once for a whole day,
only to reappear again upon his trail grim, relentless, and terrible,
reduced the Russian from a strong and robust man to an emaciated,
white-haired, fear-gibbering thing before ever the bay and the ocean
broke upon his hopeless vision.

Past populous villages he had fled.  Time and again warriors had put
out in their canoes to intercept him, but each time the hideous horde
had swept into view to send the terrified natives shrieking back to the
shore to lose themselves in the jungle.

Nowhere in his flight had he seen aught of Jane Clayton.   Not once had
his eyes rested upon her since that moment at the river's brim his hand
had closed upon the rope attached to the bow of her dugout and he had
believed her safely in his power again, only to be thwarted an instant
later as the girl snatched up a heavy express rifle from the bottom of
the craft and levelled it full at his breast.

Quickly he had dropped the rope then and seen her float away beyond his
reach, but a moment later he had been racing up-stream toward a little
tributary in the mouth of which was hidden the canoe in which he and
his party had come thus far upon their journey in pursuit of the girl
and Anderssen.

What had become of her?

There seemed little doubt in the Russian's mind, however, but that she
had been captured by warriors from one of the several villages she
would have been compelled to pass on her way down to the sea.  Well, he
was at least rid of most of his human enemies.

But at that he would gladly have had them all back in the land of the
living could he thus have been freed from the menace of the frightful
creatures who pursued him with awful relentlessness, screaming and
growling at him every time they came within sight of him.  The one that
filled him with the greatest terror was the panther--the flaming-eyed,
devil-faced panther whose grinning jaws gaped wide at him by day, and
whose fiery orbs gleamed wickedly out across the water from the
Cimmerian blackness of the jungle nights.

The sight of the mouth of the Ugambi filled Rokoff with renewed hope,
for there, upon the yellow waters of the bay, floated the Kincaid at
anchor.  He had sent the little steamer away to coal while he had gone
up the river, leaving Paulvitch in charge of her, and he could have
cried aloud in his relief as he saw that she had returned in time to
save him.

Frantically he alternately paddled furiously toward her and rose to his
feet waving his paddle and crying aloud in an attempt to attract the
attention of those on board.  But loud as he screamed his cries
awakened no answering challenge from the deck of the silent craft.

Upon the shore behind him a hurried backward glance revealed the
presence of the snarling pack.  Even now, he thought, these manlike
devils might yet find a way to reach him even upon the deck of the
steamer unless there were those there to repel them with firearms.

What could have happened to those he had left upon the Kincaid?  Where
was Paulvitch?  Could it be that the vessel was deserted, and that,
after all, he was doomed to be overtaken by the terrible fate that he
had been flying from through all these hideous days and nights?  He
shivered as might one upon whose brow death has already laid his clammy
finger.

Yet he did not cease to paddle frantically toward the steamer, and at
last, after what seemed an eternity, the bow of the dugout bumped
against the timbers of the Kincaid.  Over the ship's side hung a
monkey-ladder, but as the Russian grasped it to ascend to the deck he
heard a warning challenge from above, and, looking up, gazed into the
cold, relentless muzzle of a rifle.

After Jane Clayton, with rifle levelled at the breast of Rokoff, had
succeeded in holding him off until the dugout in which she had taken
refuge had drifted out upon the bosom of the Ugambi beyond the man's
reach, she had lost no time in paddling to the swiftest sweep of the
channel, nor did she for long days and weary nights cease to hold her
craft to the most rapidly moving part of the river, except when during
the hottest hours of the day she had been wont to drift as the current
would take her, lying prone in the bottom of the canoe, her face
sheltered from the sun with a great palm leaf.

Thus only did she gain rest upon the voyage; at other times she
continually sought to augment the movement of the craft by wielding the
heavy paddle.

Rokoff, on the other hand, had used little or no intelligence in his
flight along the Ugambi, so that more often than not his craft had
drifted in the slow-going eddies, for he habitually hugged the bank
farthest from that along which the hideous horde pursued and menaced
him.

Thus it was that, though he had put out upon the river but a short time
subsequent to the girl, yet she had reached the bay fully two hours
ahead of him.  When she had first seen the anchored ship upon the quiet
water, Jane Clayton's heart had beat fast with hope and thanksgiving,
but as she drew closer to the craft and saw that it was the Kincaid,
her pleasure gave place to the gravest misgivings.

It was too late, however, to turn back, for the current that carried
her toward the ship was much too strong for her muscles.  She could not
have forced the heavy dugout up-stream against it, and all that was
left her was to attempt either to make the shore without being seen by
those upon the deck of the Kincaid, or to throw herself upon their
mercy--otherwise she must be swept out to sea.

She knew that the shore held little hope of life for her, as she had no
knowledge of the location of the friendly Mosula village to which
Anderssen had taken her through the darkness of the night of their
escape from the Kincaid.

With Rokoff away from the steamer it might be possible that by offering
those in charge a large reward they could be induced to carry her to
the nearest civilized port.  It was worth risking--if she could make
the steamer at all.

The current was bearing her swiftly down the river, and she found that
only by dint of the utmost exertion could she direct the awkward craft
toward the vicinity of the Kincaid.   Having reached the decision to
board the steamer, she now looked to it for aid, but to her surprise
the decks appeared to be empty and she saw no sign of life aboard the
ship.

The dugout was drawing closer and closer to the bow of the vessel, and
yet no hail came over the side from any lookout aboard.  In a moment
more, Jane realized, she would be swept beyond the steamer, and then,
unless they lowered a boat to rescue her, she would be carried far out
to sea by the current and the swift ebb tide that was running.

The young woman called loudly for assistance, but there was no reply
other than the shrill scream of some savage beast upon the
jungle-shrouded shore.  Frantically Jane wielded the paddle in an
effort to carry her craft close alongside the steamer.

For a moment it seemed that she should miss her goal by but a few feet,
but at the last moment the canoe swung close beneath the steamer's bow
and Jane barely managed to grasp the anchor chain.

Heroically she clung to the heavy iron links, almost dragged from the
canoe by the strain of the current upon her craft.   Beyond her she saw
a monkey-ladder dangling over the steamer's side.  To release her hold
upon the chain and chance clambering to the ladder as her canoe was
swept beneath it seemed beyond the pale of possibility, yet to remain
clinging to the anchor chain appeared equally as futile.

Finally her glance chanced to fall upon the rope in the bow of the
dugout, and, making one end of this fast to the chain, she succeeded in
drifting the canoe slowly down until it lay directly beneath the
ladder.  A moment later, her rifle slung about her shoulders, she had
clambered safely to the deserted deck.

Her first task was to explore the ship, and this she did, her rifle
ready for instant use should she meet with any human menace aboard the
Kincaid.  She was not long in discovering the cause of the apparently
deserted condition of the steamer, for in the forecastle she found the
sailors, who had evidently been left to guard the ship, deep in drunken
slumber.

With a shudder of disgust she clambered above, and to the best of her
ability closed and made fast the hatch above the heads of the sleeping
guard.  Next she sought the galley and food, and, having appeased her
hunger, she took her place on deck, determined that none should board
the Kincaid without first having agreed to her demands.

For an hour or so nothing appeared upon the surface of the river to
cause her alarm, but then, about a bend up-stream, she saw a canoe
appear in which sat a single figure.  It had not proceeded far in her
direction before she recognized the occupant as Rokoff, and when the
fellow attempted to board he found a rifle staring him in the face.

When the Russian discovered who it was that repelled his advance he
became furious, cursing and threatening in a most horrible manner; but,
finding that these tactics failed to frighten or move the girl, he at
last fell to pleading and promising.

Jane had but a single reply for his every proposition, and that was
that nothing would ever persuade her to permit Rokoff upon the same
vessel with her.  That she would put her threats into action and shoot
him should he persist in his endeavour to board the ship he was
convinced.

So, as there was no other alternative, the great coward dropped back
into his dugout and, at imminent risk of being swept to sea, finally
succeeded in making the shore far down the bay and upon the opposite
side from that on which the horde of beasts stood snarling and roaring.

Jane Clayton knew that the fellow could not alone and unaided bring his
heavy craft back up-stream to the Kincaid, and so she had no further
fear of an attack by him.   The hideous crew upon the shore she thought
she recognized as the same that had passed her in the jungle far up the
Ugambi several days before, for it seemed quite beyond reason that
there should be more than one such a strangely assorted pack; but what
had brought them down-stream to the mouth of the river she could not
imagine.

Toward the day's close the girl was suddenly alarmed by the shouting of
the Russian from the opposite bank of the stream, and a moment later,
following the direction of his gaze, she was terrified to see a ship's
boat approaching from up-stream, in which, she felt assured, there
could be only members of the Kincaid's missing crew--only heartless
ruffians and enemies.




Chapter 16

In the Darkness of the Night


When Tarzan of the Apes realized that he was in the grip of the great
jaws of a crocodile he did not, as an ordinary man might have done,
give up all hope and resign himself to his fate.

Instead, he filled his lungs with air before the huge reptile dragged
him beneath the surface, and then, with all the might of his great
muscles, fought bitterly for freedom.  But out of his native element
the ape-man was too greatly handicapped to do more than excite the
monster to greater speed as it dragged its prey swiftly through the
water.

Tarzan's lungs were bursting for a breath of pure fresh air.   He knew
that he could survive but a moment more, and in the last paroxysm of
his suffering he did what he could to avenge his own death.

His body trailed out beside the slimy carcass of his captor, and into
the tough armour the ape-man attempted to plunge his stone knife as he
was borne to the creature's horrid den.

His efforts but served to accelerate the speed of the crocodile, and
just as the ape-man realized that he had reached the limit of his
endurance he felt his body dragged to a muddy bed and his nostrils rise
above the water's surface.  All about him was the blackness of the
pit--the silence of the grave.

For a moment Tarzan of the Apes lay gasping for breath upon the slimy,
evil-smelling bed to which the animal had borne him.  Close at his side
he could feel the cold, hard plates of the creature's coat rising and
falling as though with spasmodic efforts to breathe.

For several minutes the two lay thus, and then a sudden convulsion of
the giant carcass at the man's side, a tremor, and a stiffening brought
Tarzan to his knees beside the crocodile.   To his utter amazement he
found that the beast was dead.   The slim knife had found a vulnerable
spot in the scaly armour.

Staggering to his feet, the ape-man groped about the reeking, oozy den.
He found that he was imprisoned in a subterranean chamber amply large
enough to have accommodated a dozen or more of the huge animals such as
the one that had dragged him thither.

He realized that he was in the creature's hidden nest far under the
bank of the stream, and that doubtless the only means of ingress or
egress lay through the submerged opening through which the crocodile
had brought him.

His first thought, of course, was of escape, but that he could make his
way to the surface of the river beyond and then to the shore seemed
highly improbable.  There might be turns and windings in the neck of
the passage, or, most to be feared, he might meet another of the slimy
inhabitants of the retreat upon his journey outward.

Even should he reach the river in safety, there was still the danger of
his being again attacked before he could effect a safe landing.  Still
there was no alternative, and, filling his lungs with the close and
reeking air of the chamber, Tarzan of the Apes dived into the dark and
watery hole which he could not see but had felt out and found with his
feet and legs.

The leg which had been held within the jaws of the crocodile was badly
lacerated, but the bone had not been broken, nor were the muscles or
tendons sufficiently injured to render it useless.  It gave him
excruciating pain, that was all.

But Tarzan of the Apes was accustomed to pain, and gave it no further
thought when he found that the use of his legs was not greatly impaired
by the sharp teeth of the monster.

Rapidly he crawled and swam through the passage which inclined downward
and finally upward to open at last into the river bottom but a few feet
from the shore line.  As the ape-man reached the surface he saw the
heads of two great crocodiles but a short distance from him.  They were
making rapidly in his direction, and with a superhuman effort the man
struck out for the overhanging branches of a near-by tree.

Nor was he a moment too soon, for scarcely had he drawn himself to the
safety of the limb than two gaping mouths snapped venomously below him.
For a few minutes Tarzan rested in the tree that had proved the means
of his salvation.   His eyes scanned the river as far down-stream as
the tortuous channel would permit, but there was no sign of the Russian
or his dugout.

When he had rested and bound up his wounded leg he started on in
pursuit of the drifting canoe.  He found himself upon the opposite of
the river to that at which he had entered the stream, but as his quarry
was upon the bosom of the water it made little difference to the
ape-man upon which side he took up the pursuit.

To his intense chagrin he soon found that his leg was more badly
injured than he had thought, and that its condition seriously impeded
his progress.  It was only with the greatest difficulty that he could
proceed faster than a walk upon the ground, and in the trees he
discovered that it not only impeded his progress, but rendered
travelling distinctly dangerous.

From the old negress, Tambudza, Tarzan had gathered a suggestion that
now filled his mind with doubts and misgivings.  When the old woman had
told him of the child's death she had also added that the white woman,
though grief-stricken, had confided to her that the baby was not hers.

Tarzan could see no reason for believing that Jane could have found it
advisable to deny her identity or that of the child; the only
explanation that he could put upon the matter was that, after all, the
white woman who had accompanied his son and the Swede into the jungle
fastness of the interior had not been Jane at all.

The more he gave thought to the problem, the more firmly convinced he
became that his son was dead and his wife still safe in London, and in
ignorance of the terrible fate that had overtaken her first-born.

After all, then, his interpretation of Rokoff's sinister taunt had been
erroneous, and he had been bearing the burden of a double apprehension
needlessly--at least so thought the ape-man.   From this belief he
garnered some slight surcease from the numbing grief that the death of
his little son had thrust upon him.

And such a death!  Even the savage beast that was the real Tarzan,
inured to the sufferings and horrors of the grim jungle, shuddered as
he contemplated the hideous fate that had overtaken the innocent child.

As he made his way painfully towards the coast, he let his mind dwell
so constantly upon the frightful crimes which the Russian had
perpetrated against his loved ones that the great scar upon his
forehead stood out almost continuously in the vivid scarlet that marked
the man's most relentless and bestial moods of rage.  At times he
startled even himself and sent the lesser creatures of the wild jungle
scampering to their hiding places as involuntary roars and growls
rumbled from his throat.

Could he but lay his hand upon the Russian!

Twice upon the way to the coast bellicose natives ran threateningly
from their villages to bar his further progress, but when the awful cry
of the bull-ape thundered upon their affrighted ears, and the great
white giant charged bellowing upon them, they had turned and fled into
the bush, nor ventured thence until he had safely passed.

Though his progress seemed tantalizingly slow to the ape-man whose idea
of speed had been gained by such standards as the lesser apes attain,
he made, as a matter of fact, almost as rapid progress as the drifting
canoe that bore Rokoff on ahead of him, so that he came to the bay and
within sight of the ocean just after darkness had fallen upon the same
day that Jane Clayton and the Russian ended their flights from the
interior.

The darkness lowered so heavily upon the black river and the encircling
jungle that Tarzan, even with eyes accustomed to much use after dark,
could make out nothing a few yards from him.  His idea was to search
the shore that night for signs of the Russian and the woman who he was
certain must have preceded Rokoff down the Ugambi.  That the Kincaid or
other ship lay at anchor but a hundred yards from him he did not dream,
for no light showed on board the steamer.

Even as he commenced his search his attention was suddenly attracted by
a noise that he had not at first perceived--the stealthy dip of paddles
in the water some distance from the shore, and about opposite the point
at which he stood.   Motionless as a statue he stood listening to the
faint sound.

Presently it ceased, to be followed by a shuffling noise that the
ape-man's trained ears could interpret as resulting from but a single
cause--the scraping of leather-shod feet upon the rounds of a ship's
monkey-ladder.  And yet, as far as he could see, there was no ship
there--nor might there be one within a thousand miles.

As he stood thus, peering out into the darkness of the cloud-enshrouded
night, there came to him from across the water, like a slap in the
face, so sudden and unexpected was it, the sharp staccato of an
exchange of shots and then the scream of a woman.

Wounded though he was, and with the memory of his recent horrible
experience still strong upon him, Tarzan of the Apes did not hesitate
as the notes of that frightened cry rose shrill and piercing upon the
still night air.  With a bound he cleared the intervening bush--there
was a splash as the water closed about him--and then, with powerful
strokes, he swam out into the impenetrable night with no guide save the
memory of an illusive cry, and for company the hideous denizens of an
equatorial river.


The boat that had attracted Jane's attention as she stood guard upon
the deck of the Kincaid had been perceived by Rokoff upon one bank and
Mugambi and the horde upon the other.   The cries of the Russian had
brought the dugout first to him, and then, after a conference, it had
been turned toward the Kincaid, but before ever it covered half the
distance between the shore and the steamer a rifle had spoken from the
latter's deck and one of the sailors in the bow of the canoe had
crumpled and fallen into the water.

After that they went more slowly, and presently, when Jane's rifle had
found another member of the party, the canoe withdrew to the shore,
where it lay as long as daylight lasted.

The savage, snarling pack upon the opposite shore had been directed in
their pursuit by the black warrior, Mugambi, chief of the Wagambi.
Only he knew which might be foe and which friend of their lost master.

Could they have reached either the canoe or the Kincaid they would have
made short work of any whom they found there, but the gulf of black
water intervening shut them off from farther advance as effectually as
though it had been the broad ocean that separated them from their prey.

Mugambi knew something of the occurrences which had led up to the
landing of Tarzan upon Jungle Island and the pursuit of the whites up
the Ugambi.  He knew that his savage master sought his wife and child
who had been stolen by the wicked white man whom they had followed far
into the interior and now back to the sea.

He believed also that this same man had killed the great white giant
whom he had come to respect and love as he had never loved the greatest
chiefs of his own people.  And so in the wild breast of Mugambi burned
an iron resolve to win to the side of the wicked one and wreak
vengeance upon him for the murder of the ape-man.

But when he saw the canoe come down the river and take in Rokoff, when
he saw it make for the Kincaid, he realized that only by possessing
himself of a canoe could he hope to transport the beasts of the pack
within striking distance of the enemy.

So it happened that even before Jane Clayton fired the first shot into
Rokoff's canoe the beasts of Tarzan had disappeared into the jungle.

After the Russian and his party, which consisted of Paulvitch and the
several men he had left upon the Kincaid to attend to the matter of
coaling, had retreated before her fire, Jane realized that it would be
but a temporary respite from their attentions which she had gained, and
with the conviction came a determination to make a bold and final
stroke for freedom from the menacing threat of Rokoff's evil purpose.

With this idea in view she opened negotiations with the two sailors she
had imprisoned in the forecastle, and having forced their consent to
her plans, upon pain of death should they attempt disloyalty, she
released them just as darkness closed about the ship.

With ready revolver to compel obedience, she let them up one by one,
searching them carefully for concealed weapons as they stood with hands
elevated above their heads.  Once satisfied that they were unarmed, she
set them to work cutting the cable which held the Kincaid to her
anchorage, for her bold plan was nothing less than to set the steamer
adrift and float with her out into the open sea, there to trust to the
mercy of the elements, which she was confident would be no more
merciless than Nikolas Rokoff should he again capture her.

There was, too, the chance that the Kincaid might be sighted by some
passing ship, and as she was well stocked with provisions and
water--the men had assured her of this fact--and as the season of storm
was well over, she had every reason to hope for the eventual success of
her plan.

The night was deeply overcast, heavy clouds riding low above the jungle
and the water--only to the west, where the broad ocean spread beyond
the river's mouth, was there a suggestion of lessening gloom.

It was a perfect night for the purposes of the work in hand.

Her enemies could not see the activity aboard the ship nor mark her
course as the swift current bore her outward into the ocean.  Before
daylight broke the ebb-tide would have carried the Kincaid well into
the Benguela current which flows northward along the coast of Africa,
and, as a south wind was prevailing, Jane hoped to be out of sight of
the mouth of the Ugambi before Rokoff could become aware of the
departure of the steamer.

Standing over the labouring seamen, the young woman breathed a sigh of
relief as the last strand of the cable parted and she knew that the
vessel was on its way out of the maw of the savage Ugambi.

With her two prisoners still beneath the coercing influence of her
rifle, she ordered them upon deck with the intention of again
imprisoning them in the forecastle; but at length she permitted herself
to be influenced by their promises of loyalty and the arguments which
they put forth that they could be of service to her, and permitted them
to remain above.

For a few minutes the Kincaid drifted rapidly with the current, and
then, with a grinding jar, she stopped in midstream.   The ship had run
upon a low-lying bar that splits the channel about a quarter of a mile
from the sea.

For a moment she hung there, and then, swinging round until her bow
pointed toward the shore, she broke adrift once more.

At the same instant, just as Jane Clayton was congratulating herself
that the ship was once more free, there fell upon her ears from a point
up the river about where the Kincaid had been anchored the rattle of
musketry and a woman's scream--shrill, piercing, fear-laden.

The sailors heard the shots with certain conviction that they announced
the coming of their employer, and as they had no relish for the plan
that would consign them to the deck of a drifting derelict, they
whispered together a hurried plan to overcome the young woman and hail
Rokoff and their companions to their rescue.

It seemed that fate would play into their hands, for with the reports
of the guns Jane Clayton's attention had been distracted from her
unwilling assistants, and instead of keeping one eye upon them as she
had intended doing, she ran to the bow of the Kincaid to peer through
the darkness toward the source of the disturbance upon the river's
bosom.

Seeing that she was off her guard, the two sailors crept stealthily
upon her from behind.

The scraping upon the deck of the shoes of one of them startled the
girl to a sudden appreciation of her danger, but the warning had come
too late.

As she turned, both men leaped upon her and bore her to the deck, and
as she went down beneath them she saw, outlined against the lesser
gloom of the ocean, the figure of another man clamber over the side of
the Kincaid.

After all her pains her heroic struggle for freedom had failed.  With a
stifled sob she gave up the unequal battle.




Chapter 17

On the Deck of the "Kincaid"


When Mugambi had turned back into the jungle with the pack he had a
definite purpose in view.  It was to obtain a dugout wherewith to
transport the beasts of Tarzan to the side of the Kincaid.  Nor was he
long in coming upon the object which he sought.

Just at dusk he found a canoe moored to the bank of a small tributary
of the Ugambi at a point where he had felt certain that he should find
one.

Without loss of time he piled his hideous fellows into the craft and
shoved out into the stream.  So quickly had they taken possession of
the canoe that the warrior had not noticed that it was already
occupied.  The huddled figure sleeping in the bottom had entirely
escaped his observation in the darkness of the night that had now
fallen.

But no sooner were they afloat than a savage growling from one of the
apes directly ahead of him in the dugout attracted his attention to a
shivering and cowering figure that trembled between him and the great
anthropoid.  To Mugambi's astonishment he saw that it was a native
woman.  With difficulty he kept the ape from her throat, and after a
time succeeded in quelling her fears.

It seemed that she had been fleeing from marriage with an old man she
loathed and had taken refuge for the night in the canoe she had found
upon the river's edge.

Mugambi did not wish her presence, but there she was, and rather than
lose time by returning her to the shore the black permitted her to
remain on board the canoe.

As quickly as his awkward companions could paddle the dugout
down-stream toward the Ugambi and the Kincaid they moved through the
darkness.  It was with difficulty that Mugambi could make out the
shadowy form of the steamer, but as he had it between himself and the
ocean it was much more apparent than to one upon either shore of the
river.

As he approached it he was amazed to note that it seemed to be receding
from him, and finally he was convinced that the vessel was moving
down-stream.  Just as he was about to urge his creatures to renewed
efforts to overtake the steamer the outline of another canoe burst
suddenly into view not three yards from the bow of his own craft.

At the same instant the occupants of the stranger discovered the
proximity of Mugambi's horde, but they did not at first recognize the
nature of the fearful crew.  A man in the bow of the oncoming boat
challenged them just as the two dugouts were about to touch.

For answer came the menacing growl of a panther, and the fellow found
himself gazing into the flaming eyes of Sheeta, who had raised himself
with his forepaws upon the bow of the boat, ready to leap in upon the
occupants of the other craft.

Instantly Rokoff realized the peril that confronted him and his
fellows.  He gave a quick command to fire upon the occupants of the
other canoe, and it was this volley and the scream of the terrified
native woman in the canoe with Mugambi that both Tarzan and Jane had
heard.

Before the slower and less skilled paddlers in Mugambi's canoe could
press their advantage and effect a boarding of the enemy the latter had
turned swiftly down-stream and were paddling for their lives in the
direction of the Kincaid, which was now visible to them.

The vessel after striking upon the bar had swung loose again into a
slow-moving eddy, which returns up-stream close to the southern shore
of the Ugambi only to circle out once more and join the downward flow a
hundred yards or so farther up.  Thus the Kincaid was returning Jane
Clayton directly into the hands of her enemies.

It so happened that as Tarzan sprang into the river the vessel was not
visible to him, and as he swam out into the night he had no idea that a
ship drifted so close at hand.   He was guided by the sounds which he
could hear coming from the two canoes.

As he swam he had vivid recollections of the last occasion upon which
he had swum in the waters of the Ugambi, and with them a sudden shudder
shook the frame of the giant.

But, though he twice felt something brush his legs from the slimy
depths below him, nothing seized him, and of a sudden he quite forgot
about crocodiles in the astonishment of seeing a dark mass loom
suddenly before him where he had still expected to find the open river.

So close was it that a few strokes brought him up to the thing, when to
his amazement his outstretched hand came in contact with a ship's side.

As the agile ape-man clambered over the vessel's rail there came to his
sensitive ears the sound of a struggle at the opposite side of the deck.

Noiselessly he sped across the intervening space.

The moon had risen now, and, though the sky was still banked with
clouds, a lesser darkness enveloped the scene than that which had
blotted out all sight earlier in the night.  His keen eyes, therefore,
saw the figures of two men grappling with a woman.

That it was the woman who had accompanied Anderssen toward the interior
he did not know, though he suspected as much, as he was now quite
certain that this was the deck of the Kincaid upon which chance had led
him.

But he wasted little time in idle speculation.  There was a woman in
danger of harm from two ruffians, which was enough excuse for the
ape-man to project his giant thews into the conflict without further
investigation.

The first that either of the sailors knew that there was a new force at
work upon the ship was the falling of a mighty hand upon a shoulder of
each.  As if they had been in the grip of a fly-wheel, they were jerked
suddenly from their prey.

"What means this?" asked a low voice in their ears.

They were given no time to reply, however, for at the sound of that
voice the young woman had sprung to her feet and with a little cry of
joy leaped toward their assailant.

"Tarzan!" she cried.

The ape-man hurled the two sailors across the deck, where they rolled,
stunned and terrified, into the scuppers upon the opposite side, and
with an exclamation of incredulity gathered the girl into his arms.

Brief, however, were the moments for their greeting.

Scarcely had they recognized one another than the clouds above them
parted to show the figures of a half-dozen men clambering over the side
of the Kincaid to the steamer's deck.

Foremost among them was the Russian.  As the brilliant rays of the
equatorial moon lighted the deck, and he realized that the man before
him was Lord Greystoke, he screamed hysterical commands to his
followers to fire upon the two.

Tarzan pushed Jane behind the cabin near which they had been standing,
and with a quick bound started for Rokoff.   The men behind the
Russian, at least two of them, raised their rifles and fired at the
charging ape-man; but those behind them were otherwise engaged--for up
the monkey-ladder in their rear was thronging a hideous horde.

First came five snarling apes, huge, manlike beasts, with bared fangs
and slavering jaws; and after them a giant black warrior, his long
spear gleaming in the moonlight.

Behind him again scrambled another creature, and of all the horrid
horde it was this they most feared--Sheeta, the panther, with gleaming
jaws agape and fiery eyes blazing at them in the mightiness of his hate
and of his blood lust.

The shots that had been fired at Tarzan missed him, and he would have
been upon Rokoff in another instant had not the great coward dodged
backward between his two henchmen, and, screaming in hysterical terror,
bolted forward toward the forecastle.

For the moment Tarzan's attention was distracted by the two men before
him, so that he could not at the time pursue the Russian.  About him
the apes and Mugambi were battling with the balance of the Russian's
party.

Beneath the terrible ferocity of the beasts the men were soon
scampering in all directions--those who still lived to scamper, for the
great fangs of the apes of Akut and the tearing talons of Sheeta
already had found more than a single victim.

Four, however, escaped and disappeared into the forecastle, where they
hoped to barricade themselves against further assault.   Here they
found Rokoff, and, enraged at his desertion of them in their moment of
peril, no less than at the uniformly brutal treatment it had been his
wont to accord them, they gloated upon the opportunity now offered them
to revenge themselves in part upon their hated employer.

Despite his prayers and grovelling pleas, therefore, they hurled him
bodily out upon the deck, delivering him to the mercy of the fearful
things from which they had themselves just escaped.

Tarzan saw the man emerge from the forecastle--saw and recognized his
enemy; but another saw him even as soon.

It was Sheeta, and with grinning jaws the mighty beast slunk silently
toward the terror-stricken man.

When Rokoff saw what it was that stalked him his shrieks for help
filled the air, as with trembling knees he stood, as one paralyzed,
before the hideous death that was creeping upon him.

Tarzan took a step toward the Russian, his brain burning with a raging
fire of vengeance.  At last he had the murderer of his son at his
mercy.  His was the right to avenge.

Once Jane had stayed his hand that time that he sought to take the law
into his own power and mete to Rokoff the death that he had so long
merited; but this time none should stay him.

His fingers clenched and unclenched spasmodically as he approached the
trembling Russ, beastlike and ominous as a brute of prey.

Presently he saw that Sheeta was about to forestall him, robbing him of
the fruits of his great hate.

He called sharply to the panther, and the words, as if they had broken
a hideous spell that had held the Russian, galvanized him into sudden
action.  With a scream he turned and fled toward the bridge.

After him pounced Sheeta the panther, unmindful of his master's warning
voice.

Tarzan was about to leap after the two when he felt a light touch upon
his arm.  Turning, he found Jane at his elbow.

"Do not leave me," she whispered.  "I am afraid."

Tarzan glanced behind her.

All about were the hideous apes of Akut.  Some, even, were approaching
the young woman with bared fangs and menacing guttural warnings.

The ape-man warned them back.  He had forgotten for the moment that
these were but beasts, unable to differentiate his friends and his
foes.  Their savage natures were roused by their recent battle with the
sailors, and now all flesh outside the pack was meat to them.

Tarzan turned again toward the Russian, chagrined that he should have
to forgo the pleasure of personal revenge--unless the man should escape
Sheeta.  But as he looked he saw that there could be no hope of that.
The fellow had retreated to the end of the bridge, where he now stood
trembling and wide-eyed, facing the beast that moved slowly toward him.

The panther crawled with belly to the planking, uttering uncanny
mouthings.  Rokoff stood as though petrified, his eyes protruding from
their sockets, his mouth agape, and the cold sweat of terror clammy
upon his brow.

Below him, upon the deck, he had seen the great anthropoids, and so had
not dared to seek escape in that direction.   In fact, even now one of
the brutes was leaping to seize the bridge-rail and draw himself up to
the Russian's side.

Before him was the panther, silent and crouched.

Rokoff could not move.  His knees trembled.  His voice broke in
inarticulate shrieks.  With a last piercing wail he sank to his
knees--and then Sheeta sprang.

Full upon the man's breast the tawny body hurtled, tumbling the Russian
to his back.

As the great fangs tore at the throat and chest, Jane Clayton turned
away in horror; but not so Tarzan of the Apes.  A cold smile of
satisfaction touched his lips.  The scar upon his forehead that had
burned scarlet faded to the normal hue of his tanned skin and
disappeared.

Rokoff fought furiously but futilely against the growling, rending fate
that had overtaken him.  For all his countless crimes he was punished
in the brief moment of the hideous death that claimed him at the last.

After his struggles ceased Tarzan approached, at Jane's suggestion, to
wrest the body from the panther and give what remained of it decent
human burial; but the great cat rose snarling above its kill,
threatening even the master it loved in its savage way, so that rather
than kill his friend of the jungle, Tarzan was forced to relinquish his
intentions.

All that night Sheeta, the panther, crouched upon the grisly thing that
had been Nikolas Rokoff.  The bridge of the Kincaid was slippery with
blood.  Beneath the brilliant tropic moon the great beast feasted
until, when the sun rose the following morning, there remained of
Tarzan's great enemy only gnawed and broken bones.


Of the Russian's party, all were accounted for except Paulvitch.  Four
were prisoners in the Kincaid's forecastle.  The rest were dead.

With these men Tarzan got up steam upon the vessel, and with the
knowledge of the mate, who happened to be one of those surviving, he
planned to set out in quest of Jungle Island; but as the morning dawned
there came with it a heavy gale from the west which raised a sea into
which the mate of the Kincaid dared not venture.  All that day the ship
lay within the shelter of the mouth of the river; for, though night
witnessed a lessening of the wind, it was thought safer to wait for
daylight before attempting the navigation of the winding channel to the
sea.

Upon the deck of the steamer the pack wandered without let or hindrance
by day, for they had soon learned through Tarzan and Mugambi that they
must harm no one upon the Kincaid; but at night they were confined
below.

Tarzan's joy had been unbounded when he learned from his wife that the
little child who had died in the village of M'ganwazam was not their
son.  Who the baby could have been, or what had become of their own,
they could not imagine, and as both Rokoff and Paulvitch were gone,
there was no way of discovering.

There was, however, a certain sense of relief in the knowledge that
they might yet hope.  Until positive proof of the baby's death reached
them there was always that to buoy them up.

It seemed quite evident that their little Jack had not been brought
aboard the Kincaid.  Anderssen would have known of it had such been the
case, but he had assured Jane time and time again that the little one
he had brought to her cabin the night he aided her to escape was the
only one that had been aboard the Kincaid since she lay at Dover.




Chapter 18

Paulvitch Plots Revenge


As Jane and Tarzan stood upon the vessel's deck recounting to one
another the details of the various adventures through which each had
passed since they had parted in their London home, there glared at them
from beneath scowling brows a hidden watcher upon the shore.

Through the man's brain passed plan after plan whereby he might thwart
the escape of the Englishman and his wife, for so long as the vital
spark remained within the vindictive brain of Alexander Paulvitch none
who had aroused the enmity of the Russian might be entirely safe.

Plan after plan he formed only to discard each either as impracticable,
or unworthy the vengeance his wrongs demanded.   So warped by faulty
reasoning was the criminal mind of Rokoff's lieutenant that he could
not grasp the real truth of that which lay between himself and the
ape-man and see that always the fault had been, not with the English
lord, but with himself and his confederate.

And at the rejection of each new scheme Paulvitch arrived always at the
same conclusion--that he could accomplish naught while half the breadth
of the Ugambi separated him from the object of his hatred.

But how was he to span the crocodile-infested waters?  There was no
canoe nearer than the Mosula village, and Paulvitch was none too sure
that the Kincaid would still be at anchor in the river when he returned
should he take the time to traverse the jungle to the distant village
and return with a canoe.  Yet there was no other way, and so, convinced
that thus alone might he hope to reach his prey, Paulvitch, with a
parting scowl at the two figures upon the Kincaid's deck, turned away
from the river.

Hastening through the dense jungle, his mind centred upon his one
fetich--revenge--the Russian forgot even his terror of the savage world
through which he moved.

Baffled and beaten at every turn of Fortune's wheel, reacted upon time
after time by his own malign plotting, the principal victim of his own
criminality, Paulvitch was yet so blind as to imagine that his greatest
happiness lay in a continuation of the plottings and schemings which
had ever brought him and Rokoff to disaster, and the latter finally to
a hideous death.

As the Russian stumbled on through the jungle toward the Mosula village
there presently crystallized within his brain a plan which seemed more
feasible than any that he had as yet considered.

He would come by night to the side of the Kincaid, and once aboard,
would search out the members of the ship's original crew who had
survived the terrors of this frightful expedition, and enlist them in
an attempt to wrest the vessel from Tarzan and his beasts.

In the cabin were arms and ammunition, and hidden in a secret
receptacle in the cabin table was one of those infernal machines, the
construction of which had occupied much of Paulvitch's spare time when
he had stood high in the confidence of the Nihilists of his native land.

That was before he had sold them out for immunity and gold to the
police of Petrograd.  Paulvitch winced as he recalled the denunciation
of him that had fallen from the lips of one of his former comrades ere
the poor devil expiated his political sins at the end of a hempen rope.

But the infernal machine was the thing to think of now.   He could do
much with that if he could but get his hands upon it.  Within the
little hardwood case hidden in the cabin table rested sufficient
potential destructiveness to wipe out in the fraction of a second every
enemy aboard the Kincaid.

Paulvitch licked his lips in anticipatory joy, and urged his tired legs
to greater speed that he might not be too late to the ship's anchorage
to carry out his designs.

All depended, of course, upon when the Kincaid departed.   The Russian
realized that nothing could be accomplished beneath the light of day.
Darkness must shroud his approach to the ship's side, for should he be
sighted by Tarzan or Lady Greystoke he would have no chance to board
the vessel.

The gale that was blowing was, he believed, the cause of the delay in
getting the Kincaid under way, and if it continued to blow until night
then the chances were all in his favour, for he knew that there was
little likelihood of the ape-man attempting to navigate the tortuous
channel of the Ugambi while darkness lay upon the surface of the water,
hiding the many bars and the numerous small islands which are scattered
over the expanse of the river's mouth.

It was well after noon when Paulvitch came to the Mosula village upon
the bank of the tributary of the Ugambi.   Here he was received with
suspicion and unfriendliness by the native chief, who, like all those
who came in contact with Rokoff or Paulvitch, had suffered in some
manner from the greed, the cruelty, or the lust of the two Muscovites.

When Paulvitch demanded the use of a canoe the chief grumbled a surly
refusal and ordered the white man from the village.  Surrounded by
angry, muttering warriors who seemed to be but waiting some slight
pretext to transfix him with their menacing spears the Russian could do
naught else than withdraw.

A dozen fighting men led him to the edge of the clearing, leaving him
with a warning never to show himself again in the vicinity of their
village.

Stifling his anger, Paulvitch slunk into the jungle; but once beyond
the sight of the warriors he paused and listened intently.  He could
hear the voices of his escort as the men returned to the village, and
when he was sure that they were not following him he wormed his way
through the bushes to the edge of the river, still determined some way
to obtain a canoe.

Life itself depended upon his reaching the Kincaid and enlisting the
survivors of the ship's crew in his service, for to be abandoned here
amidst the dangers of the African jungle where he had won the enmity of
the natives was, he well knew, practically equivalent to a sentence of
death.

A desire for revenge acted as an almost equally powerful incentive to
spur him into the face of danger to accomplish his design, so that it
was a desperate man that lay hidden in the foliage beside the little
river searching with eager eyes for some sign of a small canoe which
might be easily handled by a single paddle.

Nor had the Russian long to wait before one of the awkward little
skiffs which the Mosula fashion came in sight upon the bosom of the
river.  A youth was paddling lazily out into midstream from a point
beside the village.  When he reached the channel he allowed the
sluggish current to carry him slowly along while he lolled indolently
in the bottom of his crude canoe.

All ignorant of the unseen enemy upon the river's bank the lad floated
slowly down the stream while Paulvitch followed along the jungle path a
few yards behind him.

A mile below the village the black boy dipped his paddle into the water
and forced his skiff toward the bank.   Paulvitch, elated by the chance
which had drawn the youth to the same side of the river as that along
which he followed rather than to the opposite side where he would have
been beyond the stalker's reach, hid in the brush close beside the
point at which it was evident the skiff would touch the bank of the
slow-moving stream, which seemed jealous of each fleeting instant which
drew it nearer to the broad and muddy Ugambi where it must for ever
lose its identity in the larger stream that would presently cast its
waters into the great ocean.

Equally indolent were the motions of the Mosula youth as he drew his
skiff beneath an overhanging limb of a great tree that leaned down to
implant a farewell kiss upon the bosom of the departing water,
caressing with green fronds the soft breast of its languorous love.

And, snake-like, amidst the concealing foliage lay the malevolent Russ.
Cruel, shifty eyes gloated upon the outlines of the coveted canoe, and
measured the stature of its owner, while the crafty brain weighed the
chances of the white man should physical encounter with the black
become necessary.

Only direct necessity could drive Alexander Paulvitch to personal
conflict; but it was indeed dire necessity which goaded him on to
action now.

There was time, just time enough, to reach the Kincaid by nightfall.
Would the black fool never quit his skiff?  Paulvitch squirmed and
fidgeted.  The lad yawned and stretched.   With exasperating
deliberateness he examined the arrows in his quiver, tested his bow,
and looked to the edge upon the hunting-knife in his loin-cloth.

Again he stretched and yawned, glanced up at the river-bank, shrugged
his shoulders, and lay down in the bottom of his canoe for a little nap
before he plunged into the jungle after the prey he had come forth to
hunt.

Paulvitch half rose, and with tensed muscles stood glaring down upon
his unsuspecting victim.  The boy's lids drooped and closed.  Presently
his breast rose and fell to the deep breaths of slumber.  The time had
come!

The Russian crept stealthily nearer.  A branch rustled beneath his
weight and the lad stirred in his sleep.  Paulvitch drew his revolver
and levelled it upon the black.  For a moment he remained in rigid
quiet, and then again the youth relapsed into undisturbed slumber.

The white man crept closer.  He could not chance a shot until there was
no risk of missing.  Presently he leaned close above the Mosula.  The
cold steel of the revolver in his hand insinuated itself nearer and
nearer to the breast of the unconscious lad.  Now it stopped but a few
inches above the strongly beating heart.

But the pressure of a finger lay between the harmless boy and eternity.
The soft bloom of youth still lay upon the brown cheek, a smile half
parted the beardless lips.  Did any qualm of conscience point its
disquieting finger of reproach at the murderer?

To all such was Alexander Paulvitch immune.  A sneer curled his bearded
lip as his forefinger closed upon the trigger of his revolver.  There
was a loud report.  A little hole appeared above the heart of the
sleeping boy, a little hole about which lay a blackened rim of
powder-burned flesh.

The youthful body half rose to a sitting posture.  The smiling lips
tensed to the nervous shock of a momentary agony which the conscious
mind never apprehended, and then the dead sank limply back into that
deepest of slumbers from which there is no awakening.

The killer dropped quickly into the skiff beside the killed.  Ruthless
hands seized the dead boy heartlessly and raised him to the low
gunwale.  A little shove, a splash, some widening ripples broken by the
sudden surge of a dark, hidden body from the slimy depths, and the
coveted canoe was in the sole possession of the white man--more savage
than the youth whose life he had taken.

Casting off the tie rope and seizing the paddle, Paulvitch bent
feverishly to the task of driving the skiff downward toward the Ugambi
at top speed.

Night had fallen when the prow of the bloodstained craft shot out into
the current of the larger stream.  Constantly the Russian strained his
eyes into the increasing darkness ahead in vain endeavour to pierce the
black shadows which lay between him and the anchorage of the Kincaid.

Was the ship still riding there upon the waters of the Ugambi, or had
the ape-man at last persuaded himself of the safety of venturing forth
into the abating storm?  As Paulvitch forged ahead with the current he
asked himself these questions, and many more beside, not the least
disquieting of which were those which related to his future should it
chance that the Kincaid had already steamed away, leaving him to the
merciless horrors of the savage wilderness.

In the darkness it seemed to the paddler that he was fairly flying over
the water, and he had become convinced that the ship had left her
moorings and that he had already passed the spot at which she had lain
earlier in the day, when there appeared before him beyond a projecting
point which he had but just rounded the flickering light from a ship's
lantern.

Alexander Paulvitch could scarce restrain an exclamation of triumph.
The Kincaid had not departed!  Life and vengeance were not to elude him
after all.

He stopped paddling the moment that he descried the gleaming beacon of
hope ahead of him.  Silently he drifted down the muddy waters of the
Ugambi, occasionally dipping his paddle's blade gently into the current
that he might guide his primitive craft to the vessel's side.

As he approached more closely the dark bulk of a ship loomed before him
out of the blackness of the night.   No sound came from the vessel's
deck.  Paulvitch drifted, unseen, close to the Kincaid's side.  Only
the momentary scraping of his canoe's nose against the ship's planking
broke the silence of the night.

Trembling with nervous excitement, the Russian remained motionless for
several minutes; but there was no sound from the great bulk above him
to indicate that his coming had been noted.

Stealthily he worked his craft forward until the stays of the bowsprit
were directly above him.  He could just reach them.   To make his canoe
fast there was the work of but a minute or two, and then the man raised
himself quietly aloft.

A moment later he dropped softly to the deck.  Thoughts of the hideous
pack which tenanted the ship induced cold tremors along the spine of
the cowardly prowler; but life itself depended upon the success of his
venture, and so he was enabled to steel himself to the frightful
chances which lay before him.

No sound or sign of watch appeared upon the ship's deck.   Paulvitch
crept stealthily toward the forecastle.   All was silence.  The hatch
was raised, and as the man peered downward he saw one of the Kincaid's
crew reading by the light of the smoky lantern depending from the
ceiling of the crew's quarters.

Paulvitch knew the man well, a surly cut-throat upon whom he figured
strongly in the carrying out of the plan which he had conceived.
Gently the Russ lowered himself through the aperture to the rounds of
the ladder which led into the forecastle.

He kept his eyes turned upon the reading man, ready to warn him to
silence the moment that the fellow discovered him; but so deeply
immersed was the sailor in the magazine that the Russian came,
unobserved, to the forecastle floor.

There he turned and whispered the reader's name.  The man raised his
eyes from the magazine--eyes that went wide for a moment as they fell
upon the familiar countenance of Rokoff's lieutenant, only to narrow
instantly in a scowl of disapproval.

"The devil!" he ejaculated.  "Where did you come from?  We all thought
you were done for and gone where you ought to have gone a long time
ago.  His lordship will be mighty pleased to see you."

Paulvitch crossed to the sailor's side.  A friendly smile lay on the
Russian's lips, and his right hand was extended in greeting, as though
the other might have been a dear and long lost friend.  The sailor
ignored the proffered hand, nor did he return the other's smile.

"I've come to help you," explained Paulvitch.  "I'm going to help you
get rid of the Englishman and his beasts--then there will be no danger
from the law when we get back to civilization.   We can sneak in on
them while they sleep--that is Greystoke, his wife, and that black
scoundrel, Mugambi.  Afterward it will be a simple matter to clean up
the beasts.  Where are they?"

"They're below," replied the sailor; "but just let me tell you
something, Paulvitch.  You haven't got no more show to turn us men
against the Englishman than nothing.  We had all we wanted of you and
that other beast.  He's dead, an' if I don't miss my guess a whole lot
you'll be dead too before long.   You two treated us like dogs, and if
you think we got any love for you you better forget it."

"You mean to say that you're going to turn against me?" demanded
Paulvitch.

The other nodded, and then after a momentary pause, during which an
idea seemed to have occurred to him, he spoke again.

"Unless," he said, "you can make it worth my while to let you go before
the Englishman finds you here."

"You wouldn't turn me away in the jungle, would you?" asked Paulvitch.
"Why, I'd die there in a week."

"You'd have a chance there," replied the sailor.  "Here, you wouldn't
have no chance.  Why, if I woke up my maties here they'd probably cut
your heart out of you before the Englishman got a chance at you at all.
It's mighty lucky for you that I'm the one to be awake now and not none
of the others."

"You're crazy," cried Paulvitch.  "Don't you know that the Englishman
will have you all hanged when he gets you back where the law can get
hold of you?"

"No, he won't do nothing of the kind," replied the sailor.  "He's told
us as much, for he says that there wasn't nobody to blame but you and
Rokoff--the rest of us was just tools.  See?"

For half an hour the Russian pleaded or threatened as the mood seized
him.  Sometimes he was upon the verge of tears, and again he was
promising his listener either fabulous rewards or condign punishment;
but the other was obdurate.  [condign: of equal value]

He made it plain to the Russian that there were but two plans open to
him--either he must consent to being turned over immediately to Lord
Greystoke, or he must pay to the sailor, as a price for permission to
quit the Kincaid unmolested, every cent of money and article of value
upon his person and in his cabin.

"And you'll have to make up your mind mighty quick," growled the man,
"for I want to turn in.  Come now, choose--his lordship or the jungle?"

"You'll be sorry for this," grumbled the Russian.

"Shut up," admonished the sailor.  "If you get funny I may change my
mind, and keep you here after all."

Now Paulvitch had no intention of permitting himself to fall into the
hands of Tarzan of the Apes if he could possibly avoid it, and while
the terrors of the jungle appalled him they were, to his mind,
infinitely preferable to the certain death which he knew he merited and
for which he might look at the hands of the ape-man.

"Is anyone sleeping in my cabin?" he asked.

The sailor shook his head.  "No," he said; "Lord and Lady Greystoke
have the captain's cabin.  The mate is in his own, and there ain't no
one in yours."

"I'll go and get my valuables for you," said Paulvitch.

"I'll go with you to see that you don't try any funny business," said
the sailor, and he followed the Russian up the ladder to the deck.

At the cabin entrance the sailor halted to watch, permitting Paulvitch
to go alone to his cabin.  Here he gathered together his few belongings
that were to buy him the uncertain safety of escape, and as he stood
for a moment beside the little table on which he had piled them he
searched his brain for some feasible plan either to ensure his safety
or to bring revenge upon his enemies.

And presently as he thought there recurred to his memory the little
black box which lay hidden in a secret receptacle beneath a false top
upon the table where his hand rested.

The Russian's face lighted to a sinister gleam of malevolent
satisfaction as he stooped and felt beneath the table top.   A moment
later he withdrew from its hiding-place the thing he sought.  He had
lighted the lantern swinging from the beams overhead that he might see
to collect his belongings, and now he held the black box well in the
rays of the lamplight, while he fingered at the clasp that fastened its
lid.

The lifted cover revealed two compartments within the box.   In one was
a mechanism which resembled the works of a small clock.  There also was
a little battery of two dry cells.  A wire ran from the clockwork to
one of the poles of the battery, and from the other pole through the
partition into the other compartment, a second wire returning directly
to the clockwork.

Whatever lay within the second compartment was not visible, for a cover
lay over it and appeared to be sealed in place by asphaltum.  In the
bottom of the box, beside the clockwork, lay a key, and this Paulvitch
now withdrew and fitted to the winding stem.

Gently he turned the key, muffling the noise of the winding operation
by throwing a couple of articles of clothing over the box.  All the
time he listened intently for any sound which might indicate that the
sailor or another were approaching his cabin; but none came to
interrupt his work.

When the winding was completed the Russian set a pointer upon a small
dial at the side of the clockwork, then he replaced the cover upon the
black box, and returned the entire machine to its hiding-place in the
table.

A sinister smile curled the man's bearded lips as he gathered up his
valuables, blew out the lamp, and stepped from his cabin to the side of
the waiting sailor.

"Here are my things," said the Russian; "now let me go."

"I'll first take a look in your pockets," replied the sailor.   "You
might have overlooked some trifling thing that won't be of no use to
you in the jungle, but that'll come in mighty handy to a poor sailorman
in London.  Ah! just as I feared," he ejaculated an instant later as he
withdrew a roll of bank-notes from Paulvitch's inside coat pocket.

The Russian scowled, muttering an imprecation; but nothing could be
gained by argument, and so he did his best to reconcile himself to his
loss in the knowledge that the sailor would never reach London to enjoy
the fruits of his thievery.

It was with difficulty that Paulvitch restrained a consuming desire to
taunt the man with a suggestion of the fate that would presently
overtake him and the other members of the Kincaid's company; but
fearing to arouse the fellow's suspicions, he crossed the deck and
lowered himself in silence into his canoe.

A minute or two later he was paddling toward the shore to be swallowed
up in the darkness of the jungle night, and the terrors of a hideous
existence from which, could he have had even a slight foreknowledge of
what awaited him in the long years to come, he would have fled to the
certain death of the open sea rather than endure it.

The sailor, having made sure that Paulvitch had departed, returned to
the forecastle, where he hid away his booty and turned into his bunk,
while in the cabin that had belonged to the Russian there ticked on and
on through the silences of the night the little mechanism in the small
black box which held for the unconscious sleepers upon the ill-starred
Kincaid the coming vengeance of the thwarted Russian.




Chapter 19

The Last of the "Kincaid"


Shortly after the break of day Tarzan was on deck noting the condition
of the weather.  The wind had abated.   The sky was cloudless.  Every
condition seemed ideal for the commencement of the return voyage to
Jungle Island, where the beasts were to be left.  And then--home!

The ape-man aroused the mate and gave instructions that the Kincaid
sail at the earliest possible moment.   The remaining members of the
crew, safe in Lord Greystoke's assurance that they would not be
prosecuted for their share in the villainies of the two Russians,
hastened with cheerful alacrity to their several duties.

The beasts, liberated from the confinement of the hold, wandered about
the deck, not a little to the discomfiture of the crew in whose minds
there remained a still vivid picture of the savagery of the beasts in
conflict with those who had gone to their deaths beneath the fangs and
talons which even now seemed itching for the soft flesh of further prey.

Beneath the watchful eyes of Tarzan and Mugambi, however, Sheeta and
the apes of Akut curbed their desires, so that the men worked about the
deck amongst them in far greater security than they imagined.

At last the Kincaid slipped down the Ugambi and ran out upon the
shimmering waters of the Atlantic.  Tarzan and Jane Clayton watched the
verdure-clad shore-line receding in the ship's wake, and for once the
ape-man left his native soil without one single pang of regret.

No ship that sailed the seven seas could have borne him away from
Africa to resume his search for his lost boy with half the speed that
the Englishman would have desired, and the slow-moving Kincaid seemed
scarce to move at all to the impatient mind of the bereaved father.

Yet the vessel made progress even when she seemed to be standing still,
and presently the low hills of Jungle Island became distinctly visible
upon the western horizon ahead.

In the cabin of Alexander Paulvitch the thing within the black box
ticked, ticked, ticked, with apparently unending monotony; but yet,
second by second, a little arm which protruded from the periphery of
one of its wheels came nearer and nearer to another little arm which
projected from the hand which Paulvitch had set at a certain point upon
the dial beside the clockwork.  When those two arms touched one another
the ticking of the mechanism would cease--for ever.

Jane and Tarzan stood upon the bridge looking out toward Jungle Island.
The men were forward, also watching the land grow upward out of the
ocean.  The beasts had sought the shade of the galley, where they were
curled up in sleep.   All was quiet and peace upon the ship, and upon
the waters.

Suddenly, without warning, the cabin roof shot up into the air, a cloud
of dense smoke puffed far above the Kincaid, there was a terrific
explosion which shook the vessel from stem to stern.

Instantly pandemonium broke loose upon the deck.  The apes of Akut,
terrified by the sound, ran hither and thither, snarling and growling.
Sheeta leaped here and there, screaming out his startled terror in
hideous cries that sent the ice of fear straight to the hearts of the
Kincaid's crew.

Mugambi, too, was trembling.  Only Tarzan of the Apes and his wife
retained their composure.  Scarce had the debris settled than the
ape-man was among the beasts, quieting their fears, talking to them in
low, pacific tones, stroking their shaggy bodies, and assuring them, as
only he could, that the immediate danger was over.

An examination of the wreckage showed that their greatest danger, now,
lay in fire, for the flames were licking hungrily at the splintered
wood of the wrecked cabin, and had already found a foothold upon the
lower deck through a great jagged hole which the explosion had opened.

By a miracle no member of the ship's company had been injured by the
blast, the origin of which remained for ever a total mystery to all but
one--the sailor who knew that Paulvitch had been aboard the Kincaid and
in his cabin the previous night.   He guessed the truth; but discretion
sealed his lips.  It would, doubtless, fare none too well for the man
who had permitted the arch enemy of them all aboard the ship in the
watches of the night, where later he might set an infernal machine to
blow them all to kingdom come.  No, the man decided that he would keep
this knowledge to himself.

As the flames gained headway it became apparent to Tarzan that whatever
had caused the explosion had scattered some highly inflammable
substance upon the surrounding woodwork, for the water which they
poured in from the pump seemed rather to spread than to extinguish the
blaze.

Fifteen minutes after the explosion great, black clouds of smoke were
rising from the hold of the doomed vessel.   The flames had reached the
engine-room, and the ship no longer moved toward the shore.  Her fate
was as certain as though the waters had already closed above her
charred and smoking remains.

"It is useless to remain aboard her longer," remarked the ape-man to
the mate.  "There is no telling but there may be other explosions, and
as we cannot hope to save her, the safest thing which we can do is to
take to the boats without further loss of time and make land."

Nor was there other alternative.  Only the sailors could bring away any
belongings, for the fire, which had not yet reached the forecastle, had
consumed all in the vicinity of the cabin which the explosion had not
destroyed.

Two boats were lowered, and as there was no sea the landing was made
with infinite ease.  Eager and anxious, the beasts of Tarzan sniffed
the familiar air of their native island as the small boats drew in
toward the beach, and scarce had their keels grated upon the sand than
Sheeta and the apes of Akut were over the bows and racing swiftly
toward the jungle.   A half-sad smile curved the lips of the ape-man as
he watched them go.

"Good-bye, my friends," he murmured.  "You have been good and faithful
allies, and I shall miss you."

"They will return, will they not, dear?" asked Jane Clayton, at his
side.

"They may and they may not," replied the ape-man.  "They have been ill
at ease since they were forced to accept so many human beings into
their confidence.  Mugambi and I alone affected them less, for he and I
are, at best, but half human.  You, however, and the members of the
crew are far too civilized for my beasts--it is you whom they are
fleeing.   Doubtless they feel that they cannot trust themselves in the
close vicinity of so much perfectly good food without the danger that
they may help themselves to a mouthful some time by mistake."

Jane laughed.  "I think they are just trying to escape you," she
retorted.  "You are always making them stop something which they see no
reason why they should not do.  Like little children they are doubtless
delighted at this opportunity to flee from the zone of parental
discipline.  If they come back, though, I hope they won't come by
night."

"Or come hungry, eh?" laughed Tarzan.

For two hours after landing the little party stood watching the burning
ship which they had abandoned.  Then there came faintly to them from
across the water the sound of a second explosion.   The Kincaid settled
rapidly almost immediately thereafter, and sank within a few minutes.

The cause of the second explosion was less a mystery than that of the
first, the mate attributing it to the bursting of the boilers when the
flames had finally reached them; but what had caused the first
explosion was a subject of considerable speculation among the stranded
company.




Chapter 20

Jungle Island Again


The first consideration of the party was to locate fresh water and make
camp, for all knew that their term of existence upon Jungle Island
might be drawn out to months, or even years.

Tarzan knew the nearest water, and to this he immediately led the
party.  Here the men fell to work to construct shelters and rude
furniture while Tarzan went into the jungle after meat, leaving the
faithful Mugambi and the Mosula woman to guard Jane, whose safety he
would never trust to any member of the Kincaid's cut-throat crew.

Lady Greystoke suffered far greater anguish than any other of the
castaways, for the blow to her hopes and her already cruelly lacerated
mother-heart lay not in her own privations but in the knowledge that
she might now never be able to learn the fate of her first-born or do
aught to discover his whereabouts, or ameliorate his condition--a
condition which imagination naturally pictured in the most frightful
forms.

For two weeks the party divided the time amongst the various duties
which had been allotted to each.  A daylight watch was maintained from
sunrise to sunset upon a bluff near the camp--a jutting shoulder of
rock which overlooked the sea.  Here, ready for instant lighting, was
gathered a huge pile of dry branches, while from a lofty pole which
they had set in the ground there floated an improvised distress signal
fashioned from a red undershirt which belonged to the mate of the
Kincaid.

But never a speck upon the horizon that might be sail or smoke rewarded
the tired eyes that in their endless, hopeless vigil strained daily out
across the vast expanse of ocean.

It was Tarzan who suggested, finally, that they attempt to construct a
vessel that would bear them back to the mainland.   He alone could show
them how to fashion rude tools, and when the idea had taken root in the
minds of the men they were eager to commence their labours.

But as time went on and the Herculean nature of their task became more
and more apparent they fell to grumbling, and to quarrelling among
themselves, so that to the other dangers were now added dissension and
suspicion.

More than before did Tarzan now fear to leave Jane among the half
brutes of the Kincaid's crew; but hunting he must do, for none other
could so surely go forth and return with meat as he.  Sometimes Mugambi
spelled him at the hunting; but the black's spear and arrows were never
so sure of results as the rope and knife of the ape-man.

Finally the men shirked their work, going off into the jungle by twos
to explore and to hunt.  All this time the camp had had no sight of
Sheeta, or Akut and the other great apes, though Tarzan had sometimes
met them in the jungle as he hunted.

And as matters tended from bad to worse in the camp of the castaways
upon the east coast of Jungle Island, another camp came into being upon
the north coast.

Here, in a little cove, lay a small schooner, the Cowrie, whose decks
had but a few days since run red with the blood of her officers and the
loyal members of her crew, for the Cowrie had fallen upon bad days when
it had shipped such men as Gust and Momulla the Maori and that
arch-fiend Kai Shang of Fachan.

There were others, too, ten of them all told, the scum of the South Sea
ports; but Gust and Momulla and Kai Shang were the brains and cunning
of the company.  It was they who had instigated the mutiny that they
might seize and divide the catch of pearls which constituted the wealth
of the Cowrie's cargo.

It was Kai Shang who had murdered the captain as he lay asleep in his
berth, and it had been Momulla the Maori who had led the attack upon
the officer of the watch.

Gust, after his own peculiar habit, had found means to delegate to the
others the actual taking of life.  Not that Gust entertained any
scruples on the subject, other than those which induced in him a rare
regard for his own personal safety.   There is always a certain element
of risk to the assassin, for victims of deadly assault are seldom prone
to die quietly and considerately.  There is always a certain element of
risk to go so far as to dispute the issue with the murderer.  It was
this chance of dispute which Gust preferred to forgo.

But now that the work was done the Swede aspired to the position of
highest command among the mutineers.  He had even gone so far as to
appropriate and wear certain articles belonging to the murdered captain
of the Cowrie--articles of apparel which bore upon them the badges and
insignia of authority.

Kai Shang was peeved.  He had no love for authority, and certainly not
the slightest intention of submitting to the domination of an ordinary
Swede sailor.

The seeds of discontent were, therefore, already planted in the camp of
the mutineers of the Cowrie at the north edge of Jungle Island.  But
Kai Shang realized that he must act with circumspection, for Gust alone
of the motley horde possessed sufficient knowledge of navigation to get
them out of the South Atlantic and around the cape into more congenial
waters where they might find a market for their ill-gotten wealth, and
no questions asked.

The day before they sighted Jungle Island and discovered the little
land-locked harbour upon the bosom of which the Cowrie now rode quietly
at anchor, the watch had discovered the smoke and funnels of a warship
upon the southern horizon.

The chance of being spoken to and investigated by a man-of-war appealed
not at all to any of them, so they put into hiding for a few days until
the danger should have passed.

And now Gust did not wish to venture out to sea again.   There was no
telling, he insisted, but that the ship they had seen was actually
searching for them.  Kai Shang pointed out that such could not be the
case since it was impossible for any human being other than themselves
to have knowledge of what had transpired aboard the Cowrie.

But Gust was not to be persuaded.  In his wicked heart he nursed a
scheme whereby he might increase his share of the booty by something
like one hundred per cent.  He alone could sail the Cowrie, therefore
the others could not leave Jungle Island without him; but what was
there to prevent Gust, with just sufficient men to man the schooner,
slipping away from Kai Shang, Momulla the Maori, and some half of the
crew when opportunity presented?

It was for this opportunity that Gust waited.  Some day there would
come a moment when Kai Shang, Momulla, and three or four of the others
would be absent from camp, exploring or hunting.  The Swede racked his
brain for some plan whereby he might successfully lure from the sight
of the anchored ship those whom he had determined to abandon.

To this end he organized hunting party after hunting party, but always
the devil of perversity seemed to enter the soul of Kai Shang, so that
wily celestial would never hunt except in the company of Gust himself.

One day Kai Shang spoke secretly with Momulla the Maori, pouring into
the brown ear of his companion the suspicions which he harboured
concerning the Swede.  Momulla was for going immediately and running a
long knife through the heart of the traitor.

It is true that Kai Shang had no other evidence than the natural
cunning of his own knavish soul--but he imagined in the intentions of
Gust what he himself would have been glad to accomplish had the means
lain at hand.

But he dared not let Momulla slay the Swede, upon whom they depended to
guide them to their destination.   They decided, however, that it would
do no harm to attempt to frighten Gust into acceding to their demands,
and with this purpose in mind the Maori sought out the self-constituted
commander of the party.

When he broached the subject of immediate departure Gust again raised
his former objection--that the warship might very probably be
patrolling the sea directly in their southern path, waiting for them to
make the attempt to reach other waters.

Momulla scoffed at the fears of his fellow, pointing out that as no one
aboard any warship knew of their mutiny there could be no reason why
they should be suspected.

"Ah!" exclaimed Gust, "there is where you are wrong.   There is where
you are lucky that you have an educated man like me to tell you what to
do.  You are an ignorant savage, Momulla, and so you know nothing of
wireless."

The Maori leaped to his feet and laid his hand upon the hilt of his
knife.

"I am no savage," he shouted.

"I was only joking," the Swede hastened to explain.  "We are old
friends, Momulla; we cannot afford to quarrel, at least not while old
Kai Shang is plotting to steal all the pearls from us.  If he could
find a man to navigate the Cowrie he would leave us in a minute.  All
his talk about getting away from here is just because he has some
scheme in his head to get rid of us."

"But the wireless," asked Momulla.  "What has the wireless to do with
our remaining here?"

"Oh yes," replied Gust, scratching his head.  He was wondering if the
Maori were really so ignorant as to believe the preposterous lie he was
about to unload upon him.  "Oh yes!  You see every warship is equipped
with what they call a wireless apparatus.  It lets them talk to other
ships hundreds of miles away, and it lets them listen to all that is
said on these other ships.  Now, you see, when you fellows were
shooting up the Cowrie you did a whole lot of loud talking, and there
isn't any doubt but that that warship was a-lyin' off south of us
listenin' to it all.  Of course they might not have learned the name of
the ship, but they heard enough to know that the crew of some ship was
mutinying and killin' her officers.  So you see they'll be waiting to
search every ship they sight for a long time to come, and they may not
be far away now."

When he had ceased speaking the Swede strove to assume an air of
composure that his listener might not have his suspicions aroused as to
the truth of the statements that had just been made.

Momulla sat for some time in silence, eyeing Gust.  At last he rose.

"You are a great liar," he said.  "If you don't get us on our way by
tomorrow you'll never have another chance to lie, for I heard two of
the men saying that they'd like to run a knife into you and that if you
kept them in this hole any longer they'd do it."

"Go and ask Kai Shang if there is not a wireless," replied Gust.  "He
will tell you that there is such a thing and that vessels can talk to
one another across hundreds of miles of water.   Then say to the two
men who wish to kill me that if they do so they will never live to
spend their share of the swag, for only I can get you safely to any
port."

So Momulla went to Kai Shang and asked him if there was such an
apparatus as a wireless by means of which ships could talk with each
other at great distances, and Kai Shang told him that there was.

Momulla was puzzled; but still he wished to leave the island, and was
willing to take his chances on the open sea rather than to remain
longer in the monotony of the camp.

"If we only had someone else who could navigate a ship!" wailed Kai
Shang.

That afternoon Momulla went hunting with two other Maoris.   They
hunted toward the south, and had not gone far from camp when they were
surprised by the sound of voices ahead of them in the jungle.

They knew that none of their own men had preceded them, and as all were
convinced that the island was uninhabited, they were inclined to flee
in terror on the hypothesis that the place was haunted--possibly by the
ghosts of the murdered officers and men of the Cowrie.

But Momulla was even more curious than he was superstitious, and so he
quelled his natural desire to flee from the supernatural.  Motioning
his companions to follow his example, he dropped to his hands and
knees, crawling forward stealthily and with quakings of heart through
the jungle in the direction from which came the voices of the unseen
speakers.

Presently, at the edge of a little clearing, he halted, and there he
breathed a deep sigh of relief, for plainly before him he saw two
flesh-and-blood men sitting upon a fallen log and talking earnestly
together.

One was Schneider, mate of the Kincaid, and the other was a seaman
named Schmidt.

"I think we can do it, Schmidt," Schneider was saying.   "A good canoe
wouldn't be hard to build, and three of us could paddle it to the
mainland in a day if the wind was right and the sea reasonably calm.
There ain't no use waiting for the men to build a big enough boat to
take the whole party, for they're sore now and sick of working like
slaves all day long.   It ain't none of our business anyway to save the
Englishman.   Let him look out for himself, says I."  He paused for a
moment, and then eyeing the other to note the effect of his next words,
he continued, "But we might take the woman.  It would be a shame to
leave a nice-lookin' piece like she is in such a Gott-forsaken hole as
this here island."

Schmidt looked up and grinned.

"So that's how she's blowin', is it?" he asked.  "Why didn't you say so
in the first place?  Wot's in it for me if I help you?"

"She ought to pay us well to get her back to civilization," explained
Schneider, "an' I tell you what I'll do.  I'll just whack up with the
two men that helps me.  I'll take half an' they can divide the other
half--you an' whoever the other bloke is.  I'm sick of this place, an'
the sooner I get out of it the better I'll like it.  What do you say?"

"Suits me," replied Schmidt.  "I wouldn't know how to reach the
mainland myself, an' know that none o' the other fellows would, so's
you're the only one that knows anything of navigation you're the fellow
I'll tie to."

Momulla the Maori pricked up his ears.  He had a smattering of every
tongue that is spoken upon the seas, and more than a few times had he
sailed on English ships, so that he understood fairly well all that had
passed between Schneider and Schmidt since he had stumbled upon them.

He rose to his feet and stepped into the clearing.  Schneider and his
companion started as nervously as though a ghost had risen before them.
Schneider reached for his revolver.  Momulla raised his right hand,
palm forward, as a sign of his pacific intentions.

"I am a friend," he said.  "I heard you; but do not fear that I will
reveal what you have said.  I can help you, and you can help me."  He
was addressing Schneider.  "You can navigate a ship, but you have no
ship.  We have a ship, but no one to navigate it.  If you will come
with us and ask no questions we will let you take the ship where you
will after you have landed us at a certain port, the name of which we
will give you later.  You can take the woman of whom you speak, and we
will ask no questions either.  Is it a bargain?"

Schneider desired more information, and got as much as Momulla thought
best to give him.  Then the Maori suggested that they speak with Kai
Shang.  The two members of the Kincaid's company followed Momulla and
his fellows to a point in the jungle close by the camp of the
mutineers.   Here Momulla hid them while he went in search of Kai
Shang, first admonishing his Maori companions to stand guard over the
two sailors lest they change their minds and attempt to escape.
Schneider and Schmidt were virtually prisoners, though they did not
know it.

Presently Momulla returned with Kai Shang, to whom he had briefly
narrated the details of the stroke of good fortune that had come to
them.  The Chinaman spoke at length with Schneider, until,
notwithstanding his natural suspicion of the sincerity of all men, he
became quite convinced that Schneider was quite as much a rogue as
himself and that the fellow was anxious to leave the island.

These two premises accepted there could be little doubt that Schneider
would prove trustworthy in so far as accepting the command of the
Cowrie was concerned; after that Kai Shang knew that he could find
means to coerce the man into submission to his further wishes.

When Schneider and Schmidt left them and set out in the direction of
their own camp, it was with feelings of far greater relief than they
had experienced in many a day.   Now at last they saw a feasible plan
for leaving the island upon a seaworthy craft.  There would be no more
hard labour at ship-building, and no risking their lives upon a crudely
built makeshift that would be quite as likely to go to the bottom as it
would to reach the mainland.

Also, they were to have assistance in capturing the woman, or rather
women, for when Momulla had learned that there was a black woman in the
other camp he had insisted that she be brought along as well as the
white woman.

As Kai Shang and Momulla entered their camp, it was with a realization
that they no longer needed Gust.   They marched straight to the tent in
which they might expect to find him at that hour of the day, for though
it would have been more comfortable for the entire party to remain
aboard the ship, they had mutually decided that it would be safer for
all concerned were they to pitch their camp ashore.

Each knew that in the heart of the others was sufficient treachery to
make it unsafe for any member of the party to go ashore leaving the
others in possession of the Cowrie, so not more than two or three men
at a time were ever permitted aboard the vessel unless all the balance
of the company was there too.

As the two crossed toward Gust's tent the Maori felt the edge of his
long knife with one grimy, calloused thumb.   The Swede would have felt
far from comfortable could he have seen this significant action, or
read what was passing amid the convolutions of the brown man's cruel
brain.

Now it happened that Gust was at that moment in the tent occupied by
the cook, and this tent stood but a few feet from his own.  So that he
heard the approach of Kai Shang and Momulla, though he did not, of
course, dream that it had any special significance for him.

Chance had it, though, that he glanced out of the doorway of the cook's
tent at the very moment that Kai Shang and Momulla approached the
entrance to his, and he thought that he noted a stealthiness in their
movements that comported poorly with amicable or friendly intentions,
and then, just as they two slunk within the interior, Gust caught a
glimpse of the long knife which Momulla the Maori was then carrying
behind his back.

The Swede's eyes opened wide, and a funny little sensation assailed the
roots of his hairs.  Also he turned almost white beneath his tan.
Quite precipitately he left the cook's tent.   He was not one who
required a detailed exposition of intentions that were quite all too
obvious.

As surely as though he had heard them plotting, he knew that Kai Shang
and Momulla had come to take his life.   The knowledge that he alone
could navigate the Cowrie had, up to now, been sufficient assurance of
his safety; but quite evidently something had occurred of which he had
no knowledge that would make it quite worth the while of his
co-conspirators to eliminate him.

Without a pause Gust darted across the beach and into the jungle.  He
was afraid of the jungle; uncanny noises that were indeed frightful
came forth from its recesses--the tangled mazes of the mysterious
country back of the beach.

But if Gust was afraid of the jungle he was far more afraid of Kai
Shang and Momulla.  The dangers of the jungle were more or less
problematical, while the danger that menaced him at the hands of his
companions was a perfectly well-known quantity, which might be
expressed in terms of a few inches of cold steel, or the coil of a
light rope.  He had seen Kai Shang garrotte a man at Pai-sha in a dark
alleyway back of Loo Kotai's place.  He feared the rope, therefore,
more than he did the knife of the Maori; but he feared them both too
much to remain within reach of either.  Therefore he chose the pitiless
jungle.




Chapter 21

The Law of the Jungle


In Tarzan's camp, by dint of threats and promised rewards, the ape-man
had finally succeeded in getting the hull of a large skiff almost
completed.  Much of the work he and Mugambi had done with their own
hands in addition to furnishing the camp with meat.

Schneider, the mate, had been doing considerable grumbling, and had at
last openly deserted the work and gone off into the jungle with Schmidt
to hunt.  He said that he wanted a rest, and Tarzan, rather than add to
the unpleasantness which already made camp life almost unendurable, had
permitted the two men to depart without a remonstrance.

Upon the following day, however, Schneider affected a feeling of
remorse for his action, and set to work with a will upon the skiff.
Schmidt also worked good-naturedly, and Lord Greystoke congratulated
himself that at last the men had awakened to the necessity for the
labour which was being asked of them and to their obligations to the
balance of the party.

It was with a feeling of greater relief than he had experienced for
many a day that he set out that noon to hunt deep in the jungle for a
herd of small deer which Schneider reported that he and Schmidt had
seen there the day before.

The direction in which Schneider had reported seeing the deer was
toward the south-west, and to that point the ape-man swung easily
through the tangled verdure of the forest.

And as he went there approached from the north a half-dozen
ill-featured men who went stealthily through the jungle as go men bent
upon the commission of a wicked act.

They thought that they travelled unseen; but behind them, almost from
the moment they quitted their own camp, a tall man crept upon their
trail.  In the man's eyes were hate and fear, and a great curiosity.
Why went Kai Shang and Momulla and the others thus stealthily toward
the south?  What did they expect to find there?  Gust shook his
low-browed head in perplexity.  But he would know.  He would follow
them and learn their plans, and then if he could thwart them he
would--that went without question.

At first he had thought that they searched for him; but finally his
better judgment assured him that such could not be the case, since they
had accomplished all they really desired by chasing him out of camp.
Never would Kai Shang or Momulla go to such pains to slay him or
another unless it would put money into their pockets, and as Gust had
no money it was evident that they were searching for someone else.

Presently the party he trailed came to a halt.  Its members concealed
themselves in the foliage bordering the game trail along which they had
come.  Gust, that he might the better observe, clambered into the
branches of a tree to the rear of them, being careful that the leafy
fronds hid him from the view of his erstwhile mates.

He had not long to wait before he saw a strange white man approach
carefully along the trail from the south.

At sight of the new-comer Momulla and Kai Shang arose from their places
of concealment and greeted him.  Gust could not overhear what passed
between them.  Then the man returned in the direction from which he had
come.

He was Schneider.  Nearing his camp he circled to the opposite side of
it, and presently came running in breathlessly.   Excitedly he hastened
to Mugambi.

"Quick!" he cried.  "Those apes of yours have caught Schmidt and will
kill him if we do not hasten to his aid.  You alone can call them off.
Take Jones and Sullivan--you may need help--and get to him as quick as
you can.  Follow the game trail south for about a mile.  I will remain
here.  I am too spent with running to go back with you," and the mate
of the Kincaid threw himself upon the ground, panting as though he was
almost done for.

Mugambi hesitated.  He had been left to guard the two women.   He did
not know what to do, and then Jane Clayton, who had heard Schneider's
story, added her pleas to those of the mate.

"Do not delay," she urged.  "We shall be all right here.   Mr.
Schneider will remain with us.  Go, Mugambi.  The poor fellow must be
saved."

Schmidt, who lay hidden in a bush at the edge of the camp, grinned.
Mugambi, heeding the commands of his mistress, though still doubtful of
the wisdom of his action, started off toward the south, with Jones and
Sullivan at his heels.

No sooner had he disappeared than Schmidt rose and darted north into
the jungle, and a few minutes later the face of Kai Shang of Fachan
appeared at the edge of the clearing.  Schneider saw the Chinaman, and
motioned to him that the coast was clear.

Jane Clayton and the Mosula woman were sitting at the opening of the
former's tent, their backs toward the approaching ruffians.  The first
intimation that either had of the presence of strangers in camp was the
sudden appearance of a half-dozen ragged villains about them.

"Come!" said Kai Shang, motioning that the two arise and follow him.

Jane Clayton sprang to her feet and looked about for Schneider, only to
see him standing behind the newcomers, a grin upon his face.  At his
side stood Schmidt.  Instantly she saw that she had been made the
victim of a plot.

"What is the meaning of this?" she asked, addressing the mate.

"It means that we have found a ship and that we can now escape from
Jungle Island," replied the man.

"Why did you send Mugambi and the others into the jungle?" she inquired.

"They are not coming with us--only you and I, and the Mosula woman."

"Come!" repeated Kai Shang, and seized Jane Clayton's wrist.

One of the Maoris grasped the black woman by the arm, and when she
would have screamed struck her across the mouth.

Mugambi raced through the jungle toward the south.  Jones and Sullivan
trailed far behind.  For a mile he continued upon his way to the relief
of Schmidt, but no signs saw he of the missing man or of any of the
apes of Akut.

At last he halted and called aloud the summons which he and Tarzan had
used to hail the great anthropoids.  There was no response.  Jones and
Sullivan came up with the black warrior as the latter stood voicing his
weird call.  For another half-mile the black searched, calling
occasionally.

Finally the truth flashed upon him, and then, like a frightened deer,
he wheeled and dashed back toward camp.   Arriving there, it was but a
moment before full confirmation of his fears was impressed upon him.
Lady Greystoke and the Mosula woman were gone.  So, likewise, was
Schneider.

When Jones and Sullivan joined Mugambi he would have killed them in his
anger, thinking them parties to the plot; but they finally succeeded in
partially convincing him that they had known nothing of it.

As they stood speculating upon the probable whereabouts of the women
and their abductor, and the purpose which Schneider had in mind in
taking them from camp, Tarzan of the Apes swung from the branches of a
tree and crossed the clearing toward them.

His keen eyes detected at once that something was radically wrong, and
when he had heard Mugambi's story his jaws clicked angrily together as
he knitted his brows in thought.

What could the mate hope to accomplish by taking Jane Clayton from a
camp upon a small island from which there was no escape from the
vengeance of Tarzan?  The ape-man could not believe the fellow such a
fool, and then a slight realization of the truth dawned upon him.

Schneider would not have committed such an act unless he had been
reasonably sure that there was a way by which he could quit Jungle
Island with his prisoners.  But why had he taken the black woman as
well?  There must have been others, one of whom wanted the dusky female.

"Come," said Tarzan, "there is but one thing to do now, and that is to
follow the trail."

As he finished speaking a tall, ungainly figure emerged from the jungle
north of the camp.  He came straight toward the four men.  He was an
entire stranger to all of them, not one of whom had dreamed that
another human being than those of their own camp dwelt upon the
unfriendly shores of Jungle Island.

It was Gust.  He came directly to the point.

"Your women were stolen," he said.  "If you want ever to see them
again, come quickly and follow me.  If we do not hurry the Cowrie will
be standing out to sea by the time we reach her anchorage."

"Who are you?" asked Tarzan.  "What do you know of the theft of my wife
and the black woman?"

"I heard Kai Shang and Momulla the Maori plot with two men of your
camp.  They had chased me from our camp, and would have killed me.  Now
I will get even with them.  Come!"

Gust led the four men of the Kincaid's camp at a rapid trot through the
jungle toward the north.  Would they come to the sea in time?  But a
few more minutes would answer the question.

And when at last the little party did break through the last of the
screening foliage, and the harbour and the ocean lay before them, they
realized that fate had been most cruelly unkind, for the Cowrie was
already under sail and moving slowly out of the mouth of the harbour
into the open sea.

What were they to do?  Tarzan's broad chest rose and fell to the force
of his pent emotions.  The last blow seemed to have fallen, and if ever
in all his life Tarzan of the Apes had had occasion to abandon hope it
was now that he saw the ship bearing his wife to some frightful fate
moving gracefully over the rippling water, so very near and yet so
hideously far away.

In silence he stood watching the vessel.  He saw it turn toward the
east and finally disappear around a headland on its way he knew not
whither.  Then he dropped upon his haunches and buried his face in his
hands.

It was after dark that the five men returned to the camp on the east
shore.  The night was hot and sultry.  No slightest breeze ruffled the
foliage of the trees or rippled the mirror-like surface of the ocean.
Only a gentle swell rolled softly in upon the beach.

Never had Tarzan seen the great Atlantic so ominously at peace.  He was
standing at the edge of the beach gazing out to sea in the direction of
the mainland, his mind filled with sorrow and hopelessness, when from
the jungle close behind the camp came the uncanny wail of a panther.

There was a familiar note in the weird cry, and almost mechanically
Tarzan turned his head and answered.  A moment later the tawny figure
of Sheeta slunk out into the half-light of the beach.  There was no
moon, but the sky was brilliant with stars.  Silently the savage brute
came to the side of the man.  It had been long since Tarzan had seen
his old fighting companion, but the soft purr was sufficient to assure
him that the animal still recalled the bonds which had united them in
the past.

The ape-man let his fingers fall upon the beast's coat, and as Sheeta
pressed close against his leg he caressed and fondled the wicked head
while his eyes continued to search the blackness of the waters.

Presently he started.  What was that?  He strained his eyes into the
night.  Then he turned and called aloud to the men smoking upon their
blankets in the camp.  They came running to his side; but Gust
hesitated when he saw the nature of Tarzan's companion.

"Look!" cried Tarzan.  "A light!  A ship's light!  It must be the
Cowrie.  They are becalmed."  And then with an exclamation of renewed
hope, "We can reach them!  The skiff will carry us easily."

Gust demurred.  "They are well armed," he warned.  "We could not take
the ship--just five of us."

"There are six now," replied Tarzan, pointing to Sheeta, "and we can
have more still in a half-hour.  Sheeta is the equivalent of twenty
men, and the few others I can bring will add full a hundred to our
fighting strength.  You do not know them."

The ape-man turned and raised his head toward the jungle, while there
pealed from his lips, time after time, the fearsome cry of the bull-ape
who would summon his fellows.

Presently from the jungle came an answering cry, and then another and
another.  Gust shuddered.  Among what sort of creatures had fate thrown
him?  Were not Kai Shang and Momulla to be preferred to this great
white giant who stroked a panther and called to the beasts of the
jungle?

In a few minutes the apes of Akut came crashing through the underbrush
and out upon the beach, while in the meantime the five men had been
struggling with the unwieldy bulk of the skiff's hull.

By dint of Herculean efforts they had managed to get it to the water's
edge.  The oars from the two small boats of the Kincaid, which had been
washed away by an off-shore wind the very night that the party had
landed, had been in use to support the canvas of the sailcloth tents.
These were hastily requisitioned, and by the time Akut and his
followers came down to the water all was ready for embarkation.

Once again the hideous crew entered the service of their master, and
without question took up their places in the skiff.   The four men, for
Gust could not be prevailed upon to accompany the party, fell to the
oars, using them paddle-wise, while some of the apes followed their
example, and presently the ungainly skiff was moving quietly out to sea
in the direction of the light which rose and fell gently with the swell.

A sleepy sailor kept a poor vigil upon the Cowrie's deck, while in the
cabin below Schneider paced up and down arguing with Jane Clayton.  The
woman had found a revolver in a table drawer in the room in which she
had been locked, and now she kept the mate of the Kincaid at bay with
the weapon.

The Mosula woman kneeled behind her, while Schneider paced up and down
before the door, threatening and pleading and promising, but all to no
avail.  Presently from the deck above came a shout of warning and a
shot.  For an instant Jane Clayton relaxed her vigilance, and turned
her eyes toward the cabin skylight.  Simultaneously Schneider was upon
her.

The first intimation the watch had that there was another craft within
a thousand miles of the Cowrie came when he saw the head and shoulders
of a man poked over the ship's side.   Instantly the fellow sprang to
his feet with a cry and levelled his revolver at the intruder.  It was
his cry and the subsequent report of the revolver which threw Jane
Clayton off her guard.

Upon deck the quiet of fancied security soon gave place to the wildest
pandemonium.  The crew of the Cowrie rushed above armed with revolvers,
cutlasses, and the long knives that many of them habitually wore; but
the alarm had come too late.  Already the beasts of Tarzan were upon
the ship's deck, with Tarzan and the two men of the Kincaid's crew.

In the face of the frightful beasts the courage of the mutineers
wavered and broke.  Those with revolvers fired a few scattering shots
and then raced for some place of supposed safety.  Into the shrouds
went some; but the apes of Akut were more at home there than they.

Screaming with terror the Maoris were dragged from their lofty perches.
The beasts, uncontrolled by Tarzan who had gone in search of Jane,
loosed the full fury of their savage natures upon the unhappy
wretches who fell into their clutches.

Sheeta, in the meanwhile, had felt his great fangs sink into but a
single jugular.  For a moment he mauled the corpse, and then he spied
Kai Shang darting down the companionway toward his cabin.

With a shrill scream Sheeta was after him--a scream which awoke an
almost equally uncanny cry in the throat of the terror-stricken
Chinaman.

But Kai Shang reached his cabin a fraction of a second ahead of the
panther, and leaping within slammed the door--just too late.  Sheeta's
great body hurtled against it before the catch engaged, and a moment
later Kai Shang was gibbering and shrieking in the back of an upper
berth.

Lightly Sheeta sprang after his victim, and presently the wicked days
of Kai Shang of Fachan were ended, and Sheeta was gorging himself upon
tough and stringy flesh.

A moment scarcely had elapsed after Schneider leaped upon Jane Clayton
and wrenched the revolver from her hand, when the door of the cabin
opened and a tall and half-naked white man stood framed within the
portal.

Silently he leaped across the cabin.  Schneider felt sinewy fingers at
his throat.  He turned his head to see who had attacked him, and his
eyes went wide when he saw the face of the ape-man close above his own.

Grimly the fingers tightened upon the mate's throat.  He tried to
scream, to plead, but no sound came forth.  His eyes protruded as he
struggled for freedom, for breath, for life.

Jane Clayton seized her husband's hands and tried to drag them from the
throat of the dying man; but Tarzan only shook his head.

"Not again," he said quietly.  "Before have I permitted scoundrels to
live, only to suffer and to have you suffer for my mercy.  This time we
shall make sure of one scoundrel--sure that he will never again harm us
or another," and with a sudden wrench he twisted the neck of the
perfidious mate until there was a sharp crack, and the man's body lay
limp and motionless in the ape-man's grasp.  With a gesture of disgust
Tarzan tossed the corpse aside.  Then he returned to the deck, followed
by Jane and the Mosula woman.

The battle there was over.  Schmidt and Momulla and two others alone
remained alive of all the company of the Cowrie, for they had found
sanctuary in the forecastle.  The others had died, horribly, and as
they deserved, beneath the fangs and talons of the beasts of Tarzan,
and in the morning the sun rose on a grisly sight upon the deck of the
unhappy Cowrie; but this time the blood which stained her white
planking was the blood of the guilty and not of the innocent.

Tarzan brought forth the men who had hidden in the forecastle, and
without promises of immunity from punishment forced them to help work
the vessel--the only alternative was immediate death.

A stiff breeze had risen with the sun, and with canvas spread the
Cowrie set in toward Jungle Island, where a few hours later, Tarzan
picked up Gust and bid farewell to Sheeta and the apes of Akut, for
here he set the beasts ashore to pursue the wild and natural life they
loved so well; nor did they lose a moment's time in disappearing into
the cool depths of their beloved jungle.

That they knew that Tarzan was to leave them may be doubted--except
possibly in the case of the more intelligent Akut, who alone of all the
others remained upon the beach as the small boat drew away toward the
schooner, carrying his savage lord and master from him.

And as long as their eyes could span the distance, Jane and Tarzan,
standing upon the deck, saw the lonely figure of the shaggy anthropoid
motionless upon the surf-beaten sands of Jungle Island.


It was three days later that the Cowrie fell in with H.M. sloop-of-war
Shorewater, through whose wireless Lord Greystoke soon got in
communication with London.  Thus he learned that which filled his and
his wife's heart with joy and thanksgiving--little Jack was safe at
Lord Greystoke's town house.

It was not until they reached London that they learned the details of
the remarkable chain of circumstances that had preserved the infant
unharmed.

It developed that Rokoff, fearing to take the child aboard the Kincaid
by day, had hidden it in a low den where nameless infants were
harboured, intending to carry it to the steamer after dark.

His confederate and chief lieutenant, Paulvitch, true to the long years
of teaching of his wily master, had at last succumbed to the treachery
and greed that had always marked his superior, and, lured by the
thoughts of the immense ransom that he might win by returning the child
unharmed, had divulged the secret of its parentage to the woman who
maintained the foundling asylum.  Through her he had arranged for the
substitution of another infant, knowing full well that never until it
was too late would Rokoff suspect the trick that had been played upon
him.

The woman had promised to keep the child until Paulvitch returned to
England; but she, in turn, had been tempted to betray her trust by the
lure of gold, and so had opened negotiations with Lord Greystoke's
solicitors for the return of the child.

Esmeralda, the old Negro nurse whose absence on a vacation in America
at the time of the abduction of little Jack had been attributed by her
as the cause of the calamity, had returned and positively identified
the infant.

The ransom had been paid, and within ten days of the date of his
kidnapping the future Lord Greystoke, none the worse for his
experience, had been returned to his father's home.

And so that last and greatest of Nikolas Rokoff's many rascalities had
not only miserably miscarried through the treachery he had taught his
only friend, but it had resulted in the arch-villain's death, and given
to Lord and Lady Greystoke a peace of mind that neither could ever have
felt so long as the vital spark remained in the body of the Russian and
his malign mind was free to formulate new atrocities against them.

Rokoff was dead, and while the fate of Paulvitch was unknown, they had
every reason to believe that he had succumbed to the dangers of the
jungle where last they had seen him--the malicious tool of his master.

And thus, in so far as they might know, they were to be freed for ever
from the menace of these two men--the only enemies which Tarzan of the
Apes ever had had occasion to fear, because they struck at him cowardly
blows, through those he loved.


It was a happy family party that were reunited in Greystoke House the
day that Lord Greystoke and his lady landed upon English soil from the
deck of the Shorewater.

Accompanying them were Mugambi and the Mosula woman whom he had found
in the bottom of the canoe that night upon the bank of the little
tributary of the Ugambi.

The woman had preferred to cling to her new lord and master  rather
than return to the marriage she had tried to escape.

Tarzan had proposed to them that they might find a home upon his vast
African estates in the land of the Waziri, where they were to be sent
as soon as opportunity presented itself.

Possibly we shall see them all there amid the savage romance of the
grim jungle and the great plains where Tarzan of the Apes loves best to
be.

Who knows?









End of Project Gutenberg's The Beasts of Tarzan, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BEASTS OF TARZAN ***

***** This file should be named 85.txt or 85.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/85/

Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Son of Tarzan, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Son of Tarzan

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Release Date: June 23, 2008 [EBook #90]
[Last updated: May 24, 2012]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SON OF TARZAN ***







The Son Of Tarzan


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs




To Hulbert Burroughs




Chapter 1


The long boat of the Marjorie W. was floating down the broad Ugambi
with ebb tide and current.  Her crew were lazily enjoying this respite
from the arduous labor of rowing up stream.  Three miles below them lay
the Marjorie W.  herself, quite ready to sail so soon as they should
have clambered aboard and swung the long boat to its davits.  Presently
the attention of every man was drawn from his dreaming or his gossiping
to the northern bank of the river.  There, screaming at them in a
cracked falsetto and with skinny arms outstretched, stood a strange
apparition of a man.

"Wot the 'ell?" ejaculated one of the crew.

"A white man!" muttered the mate, and then:  "Man the oars, boys, and
we'll just pull over an' see what he wants."

When they came close to the shore they saw an emaciated creature with
scant white locks tangled and matted.  The thin, bent body was naked
but for a loin cloth.  Tears were rolling down the sunken pock-marked
cheeks.  The man jabbered at them in a strange tongue.

"Rooshun," hazarded the mate.  "Savvy English?" he called to the man.

He did, and in that tongue, brokenly and haltingly, as though it had
been many years since he had used it, he begged them to take him with
them away from this awful country.  Once on board the Marjorie W. the
stranger told his rescuers a pitiful tale of privation, hardships, and
torture, extending over a period of ten years.  How he happened to have
come to Africa he did not tell them, leaving them to assume he had
forgotten the incidents of his life prior to the frightful ordeals that
had wrecked him mentally and physically.  He did not even tell them his
true name, and so they knew him only as Michael Sabrov, nor was there
any resemblance between this sorry wreck and the virile, though
unprincipled, Alexis Paulvitch of old.

It had been ten years since the Russian had escaped the fate of his
friend, the arch-fiend Rokoff, and not once, but many times during
those ten years had Paulvitch cursed the fate that had given to
Nicholas Rokoff death and immunity from suffering while it had meted to
him the hideous terrors of an existence infinitely worse than the death
that persistently refused to claim him.

Paulvitch had taken to the jungle when he had seen the beasts of Tarzan
and their savage lord swarm the deck of the Kincaid, and in his terror
lest Tarzan pursue and capture him he had stumbled on deep into the
jungle, only to fall at last into the hands of one of the savage
cannibal tribes that had felt the weight of Rokoff's evil temper and
cruel brutality.  Some strange whim of the chief of this tribe saved
Paulvitch from death only to plunge him into a life of misery and
torture.  For ten years he had been the butt of the village, beaten and
stoned by the women and children, cut and slashed and disfigured by the
warriors; a victim of often recurring fevers of the most malignant
variety.  Yet he did not die.  Smallpox laid its hideous clutches upon
him; leaving him unspeakably branded with its repulsive marks.  Between
it and the attentions of the tribe the countenance of Alexis Paulvitch
was so altered that his own mother could not have recognized in the
pitiful mask he called his face a single familiar feature.  A few
scraggly, yellow-white locks had supplanted the thick, dark hair that
had covered his head.  His limbs were bent and twisted, he walked with
a shuffling, unsteady gait, his body doubled forward.  His teeth were
gone--knocked out by his savage masters.  Even his mentality was but a
sorry mockery of what it once had been.

They took him aboard the Marjorie W., and there they fed and nursed
him.  He gained a little in strength; but his appearance never altered
for the better--a human derelict, battered and wrecked, they had found
him; a human derelict, battered and wrecked, he would remain until
death claimed him.  Though still in his thirties, Alexis Paulvitch
could easily have passed for eighty.  Inscrutable Nature had demanded
of the accomplice a greater penalty than his principal had paid.

In the mind of Alexis Paulvitch there lingered no thoughts of
revenge--only a dull hatred of the man whom he and Rokoff had tried to
break, and failed.  There was hatred, too, of the memory of Rokoff, for
Rokoff had led him into the horrors he had undergone.  There was hatred
of the police of a score of cities from which he had had to flee.
There was hatred of law, hatred of order, hatred of everything.  Every
moment of the man's waking life was filled with morbid thought of
hatred--he had become mentally as he was physically in outward
appearance, the personification of the blighting emotion of Hate.  He
had little or nothing to do with the men who had rescued him.  He was
too weak to work and too morose for company, and so they quickly left
him alone to his own devices.

The Marjorie W. had been chartered by a syndicate of wealthy
manufacturers, equipped with a laboratory and a staff of scientists,
and sent out to search for some natural product which the manufacturers
who footed the bills had been importing from South America at an
enormous cost.  What the product was none on board the Marjorie W. knew
except the scientists, nor is it of any moment to us, other than that
it led the ship to a certain island off the coast of Africa after
Alexis Paulvitch had been taken aboard.

The ship lay at anchor off the coast for several weeks.  The monotony
of life aboard her became trying for the crew.  They went often ashore,
and finally Paulvitch asked to accompany them--he too was tiring of the
blighting sameness of existence upon the ship.

The island was heavily timbered.  Dense jungle ran down almost to the
beach.  The scientists were far inland, prosecuting their search for
the valuable commodity that native rumor upon the mainland had led them
to believe might be found here in marketable quantity.  The ship's
company fished, hunted, and explored.  Paulvitch shuffled up and down
the beach, or lay in the shade of the great trees that skirted it.  One
day, as the men were gathered at a little distance inspecting the body
of a panther that had fallen to the gun of one of them who had been
hunting inland, Paulvitch lay sleeping beneath his tree.  He was
awakened by the touch of a hand upon his shoulder.  With a start he sat
up to see a huge, anthropoid ape squatting at his side, inspecting him
intently.  The Russian was thoroughly frightened.  He glanced toward
the sailors--they were a couple of hundred yards away.  Again the ape
plucked at his shoulder, jabbering plaintively.  Paulvitch saw no
menace in the inquiring gaze, or in the attitude of the beast.  He got
slowly to his feet.  The ape rose at his side.

Half doubled, the man shuffled cautiously away toward the sailors.  The
ape moved with him, taking one of his arms.  They had come almost to
the little knot of men before they were seen, and by this time
Paulvitch had become assured that the beast meant no harm.  The animal
evidently was accustomed to the association of human beings.  It
occurred to the Russian that the ape represented a certain considerable
money value, and before they reached the sailors he had decided he
should be the one to profit by it.

When the men looked up and saw the oddly paired couple shuffling toward
them they were filled with amazement, and started on a run toward the
two.  The ape showed no sign of fear.  Instead he grasped each sailor
by the shoulder and peered long and earnestly into his face.  Having
inspected them all he returned to Paulvitch's side, disappointment
written strongly upon his countenance and in his carriage.

The men were delighted with him.  They gathered about, asking Paulvitch
many questions, and examining his companion.  The Russian told them
that the ape was his--nothing further would he offer--but kept harping
continually upon the same theme, "The ape is mine.  The ape is mine."
Tiring of Paulvitch, one of the men essayed a pleasantry.  Circling
about behind the ape he prodded the anthropoid in the back with a pin.
Like a flash the beast wheeled upon its tormentor, and, in the briefest
instant of turning, the placid, friendly animal was metamorphosed to a
frenzied demon of rage.  The broad grin that had sat upon the sailor's
face as he perpetrated his little joke froze to an expression of
terror.  He attempted to dodge the long arms that reached for him; but,
failing, drew a long knife that hung at his belt.  With a single wrench
the ape tore the weapon from the man's grasp and flung it to one side,
then his yellow fangs were buried in the sailor's shoulder.

With sticks and knives the man's companions fell upon the beast, while
Paulvitch danced around the cursing, snarling pack mumbling and
screaming pleas and threats.  He saw his visions of wealth rapidly
dissipating before the weapons of the sailors.

The ape, however, proved no easy victim to the superior numbers that
seemed fated to overwhelm him.  Rising from the sailor who had
precipitated the battle he shook his giant shoulders, freeing himself
from two of the men that were clinging to his back, and with mighty
blows of his open palms felled one after another of his attackers,
leaping hither and thither with the agility of a small monkey.

The fight had been witnessed by the captain and mate who were just
landing from the Marjorie W., and Paulvitch saw these two now running
forward with drawn revolvers while the two sailors who had brought them
ashore trailed at their heels.  The ape stood looking about him at the
havoc he had wrought, but whether he was awaiting a renewal of the
attack or was deliberating which of his foes he should exterminate
first Paulvitch could not guess.  What he could guess, however, was
that the moment the two officers came within firing distance of the
beast they would put an end to him in short order unless something were
done and done quickly to prevent.  The ape had made no move to attack
the Russian but even so the man was none too sure of what might happen
were he to interfere with the savage beast, now thoroughly aroused to
bestial rage, and with the smell of new spilled blood fresh in its
nostrils.  For an instant he hesitated, and then again there rose
before him the dreams of affluence which this great anthropoid would
doubtless turn to realities once Paulvitch had landed him safely in
some great metropolis like London.

The captain was shouting to him now to stand aside that he might have a
shot at the animal; but instead Paulvitch shuffled to the ape's side,
and though the man's hair quivered at its roots he mastered his fear
and laid hold of the ape's arm.

"Come!" he commanded, and tugged to pull the beast from among the
sailors, many of whom were now sitting up in wide eyed fright or
crawling away from their conqueror upon hands and knees.

Slowly the ape permitted itself to be led to one side, nor did it show
the slightest indication of a desire to harm the Russian.  The captain
came to a halt a few paces from the odd pair.

"Get aside, Sabrov!" he commanded.  "I'll put that brute where he won't
chew up any more able seamen."

"It wasn't his fault, captain," pleaded Paulvitch.  "Please don't shoot
him.  The men started it--they attacked him first.  You see, he's
perfectly gentle--and he's mine--he's mine--he's mine!  I won't let you
kill him," he concluded, as his half-wrecked mentality pictured anew
the pleasure that money would buy in London--money that he could not
hope to possess without some such windfall as the ape represented.

The captain lowered his weapon.  "The men started it, did they?" he
repeated.  "How about that?" and he turned toward the sailors who had
by this time picked themselves from the ground, none of them much the
worse for his experience except the fellow who had been the cause of
it, and who would doubtless nurse a sore shoulder for a week or so.

"Simpson done it," said one of the men.  "He stuck a pin into the monk
from behind, and the monk got him--which served him bloomin' well
right--an' he got the rest of us, too, for which I can't blame him,
since we all jumped him to once."

The captain looked at Simpson, who sheepishly admitted the truth of the
allegation, then he stepped over to the ape as though to discover for
himself the sort of temper the beast possessed, but it was noticeable
that he kept his revolver cocked and leveled as he did so.  However, he
spoke soothingly to the animal who squatted at the Russian's side
looking first at one and then another of the sailors.  As the captain
approached him the ape half rose and waddled forward to meet him.  Upon
his countenance was the same strange, searching expression that had
marked his scrutiny of each of the sailors he had first encountered.
He came quite close to the officer and laid a paw upon one of the man's
shoulders, studying his face intently for a long moment, then came the
expression of disappointment accompanied by what was almost a human
sigh, as he turned away to peer in the same curious fashion into the
faces of the mate and the two sailors who had arrived with the
officers.  In each instance he sighed and passed on, returning at
length to Paulvitch's side, where he squatted down once more;
thereafter evincing little or no interest in any of the other men, and
apparently forgetful of his recent battle with them.

When the party returned aboard the Marjorie W., Paulvitch was
accompanied by the ape, who seemed anxious to follow him.  The captain
interposed no obstacles to the arrangement, and so the great anthropoid
was tacitly admitted to membership in the ship's company.  Once aboard
he examined each new face minutely, evincing the same disappointment in
each instance that had marked his scrutiny of the others.  The officers
and scientists aboard often discussed the beast, but they were unable
to account satisfactorily for the strange ceremony with which he
greeted each new face.  Had he been discovered upon the mainland, or
any other place than the almost unknown island that had been his home,
they would have concluded that he had formerly been a pet of man; but
that theory was not tenable in the face of the isolation of his
uninhabited island.  He seemed continually to be searching for someone,
and during the first days of the return voyage from the island he was
often discovered nosing about in various parts of the ship; but after
he had seen and examined each face of the ship's company, and explored
every corner of the vessel he lapsed into utter indifference of all
about him.  Even the Russian elicited only casual interest when he
brought him food.  At other times the ape appeared merely to tolerate
him.  He never showed affection for him, or for anyone else upon the
Marjorie W., nor did he at any time evince any indication of the savage
temper that had marked his resentment of the attack of the sailors upon
him at the time that he had come among them.

Most of his time was spent in the eye of the ship scanning the horizon
ahead, as though he were endowed with sufficient reason to know that
the vessel was bound for some port where there would be other human
beings to undergo his searching scrutiny.  All in all, Ajax, as he had
been dubbed, was considered the most remarkable and intelligent ape
that any one aboard the Marjorie W. ever had seen.  Nor was his
intelligence the only remarkable attribute he owned.  His stature and
physique were, for an ape, awe inspiring.  That he was old was quite
evident, but if his age had impaired his physical or mental powers in
the slightest it was not apparent.

And so at length the Marjorie W. came to England, and there the
officers and the scientists, filled with compassion for the pitiful
wreck of a man they had rescued from the jungles, furnished Paulvitch
with funds and bid him and his Ajax Godspeed.

Upon the dock and all through the journey to London the Russian had his
hands full with Ajax.  Each new face of the thousands that came within
the anthropoid's ken must be carefully scrutinized, much to the horror
of many of his victims; but at last, failing, apparently, to discover
whom he sought, the great ape relapsed into morbid indifference, only
occasionally evincing interest in a passing face.

In London, Paulvitch went directly with his prize to a certain famous
animal trainer.  This man was much impressed with Ajax with the result
that he agreed to train him for a lion's share of the profits of
exhibiting him, and in the meantime to provide for the keep of both the
ape and his owner.

And so came Ajax to London, and there was forged another link in the
chain of strange circumstances that were to affect the lives of many
people.




Chapter 2


Mr. Harold Moore was a bilious-countenanced, studious young man.  He
took himself very seriously, and life, and his work, which latter was
the tutoring of the young son of a British nobleman.  He felt that his
charge was not making the progress that his parents had a right to
expect, and he was now conscientiously explaining this fact to the
boy's mother.

"It's not that he isn't bright," he was saying; "if that were true I
should have hopes of succeeding, for then I might bring to bear all my
energies in overcoming his obtuseness; but the trouble is that he is
exceptionally intelligent, and learns so quickly that I can find no
fault in the matter of the preparation of his lessons.  What concerns
me, however, is the fact that he evidently takes no interest whatever
in the subjects we are studying.  He merely accomplishes each lesson as
a task to be rid of as quickly as possible and I am sure that no lesson
ever again enters his mind until the hours of study and recitation once
more arrive.  His sole interests seem to be feats of physical prowess
and the reading of everything that he can get hold of relative to
savage beasts and the lives and customs of uncivilized peoples; but
particularly do stories of animals appeal to him.  He will sit for
hours together poring over the work of some African explorer, and upon
two occasions I have found him setting up in bed at night reading Carl
Hagenbeck's book on men and beasts."

The boy's mother tapped her foot nervously upon the hearth rug.

"You discourage this, of course?" she ventured.

Mr. Moore shuffled embarrassedly.

"I--ah--essayed to take the book from him," he replied, a slight flush
mounting his sallow cheek; "but--ah--your son is quite muscular for one
so young."

"He wouldn't let you take it?" asked the mother.

"He would not," confessed the tutor.  "He was perfectly good natured
about it; but he insisted upon pretending that he was a gorilla and
that I was a chimpanzee attempting to steal food from him.  He leaped
upon me with the most savage growls I ever heard, lifted me completely
above his head, hurled me upon his bed, and after going through a
pantomime indicative of choking me to death he stood upon my prostrate
form and gave voice to a most fearsome shriek, which he explained was
the victory cry of a bull ape.  Then he carried me to the door, shoved
me out into the hall and locked me from his room."

For several minutes neither spoke again.  It was the boy's mother who
finally broke the silence.

"It is very necessary, Mr. Moore," she said, "that you do everything in
your power to discourage this tendency in Jack, he--"; but she got no
further.  A loud "Whoop!" from the direction of the window brought them
both to their feet.  The room was upon the second floor of the house,
and opposite the window to which their attention had been attracted was
a large tree, a branch of which spread to within a few feet of the
sill.  Upon this branch now they both discovered the subject of their
recent conversation, a tall, well-built boy, balancing with ease upon
the bending limb and uttering loud shouts of glee as he noted the
terrified expressions upon the faces of his audience.

The mother and tutor both rushed toward the window but before they had
crossed half the room the boy had leaped nimbly to the sill and entered
the apartment with them.

"'The wild man from Borneo has just come to town,'" he sang, dancing a
species of war dance about his terrified mother and scandalized tutor,
and ending up by throwing his arms about the former's neck and kissing
her upon either cheek.

"Oh, Mother," he cried, "there's a wonderful, educated ape being shown
at one of the music halls.  Willie Grimsby saw it last night.  He says
it can do everything but talk.  It rides a bicycle, eats with knife and
fork, counts up to ten, and ever so many other wonderful things, and
can I go and see it too?  Oh, please, Mother--please let me."

Patting the boy's cheek affectionately, the mother shook her head
negatively.  "No, Jack," she said; "you know I do not approve of such
exhibitions."

"I don't see why not, Mother," replied the boy.  "All the other fellows
go and they go to the Zoo, too, and you'll never let me do even that.
Anybody'd think I was a girl--or a mollycoddle.  Oh, Father," he
exclaimed, as the door opened to admit a tall gray-eyed man.  "Oh,
Father, can't I go?"

"Go where, my son?" asked the newcomer.

"He wants to go to a music hall to see a trained ape," said the mother,
looking warningly at her husband.

"Who, Ajax?" questioned the man.

The boy nodded.

"Well, I don't know that I blame you, my son," said the father, "I
wouldn't mind seeing him myself.  They say he is very wonderful, and
that for an anthropoid he is unusually large.  Let's all go, Jane--what
do you say?"  And he turned toward his wife, but that lady only shook
her head in a most positive manner, and turning to Mr. Moore asked him
if it was not time that he and Jack were in the study for the morning
recitations.  When the two had left she turned toward her husband.

"John," she said, "something must be done to discourage Jack's tendency
toward anything that may excite the cravings for the savage life which
I fear he has inherited from you.  You know from your own experience
how strong is the call of the wild at times.  You know that often it
has necessitated a stern struggle on your part to resist the almost
insane desire which occasionally overwhelms you to plunge once again
into the jungle life that claimed you for so many years, and at the
same time you know, better than any other, how frightful a fate it
would be for Jack, were the trail to the savage jungle made either
alluring or easy to him."

"I doubt if there is any danger of his inheriting a taste for jungle
life from me," replied the man, "for I cannot conceive that such a
thing may be transmitted from father to son.  And sometimes, Jane, I
think that in your solicitude for his future you go a bit too far in
your restrictive measures.  His love for animals--his desire, for
example, to see this trained ape--is only natural in a healthy, normal
boy of his age.  Just because he wants to see Ajax is no indication
that he would wish to marry an ape, and even should he, far be it from
you Jane to have the right to cry 'shame!'" and John Clayton, Lord
Greystoke, put an arm about his wife, laughing good-naturedly down into
her upturned face before he bent his head and kissed her.  Then, more
seriously, he continued:  "You have never told Jack anything concerning
my early life, nor have you permitted me to, and in this I think that
you have made a mistake.  Had I been able to tell him of the
experiences of Tarzan of the Apes I could doubtless have taken much of
the glamour and romance from jungle life that naturally surrounds it in
the minds of those who have had no experience of it.  He might then
have profited by my experience, but now, should the jungle lust ever
claim him, he will have nothing to guide him but his own impulses, and
I know how powerful these may be in the wrong direction at times."

But Lady Greystoke only shook her head as she had a hundred other times
when the subject had claimed her attention in the past.

"No, John," she insisted, "I shall never give my consent to the
implanting in Jack's mind of any suggestion of the savage life which we
both wish to preserve him from."

It was evening before the subject was again referred to and then it was
raised by Jack himself.  He had been sitting, curled in a large chair,
reading, when he suddenly looked up and addressed his father.

"Why," he asked, coming directly to the point, "can't I go and see
Ajax?"

"Your mother does not approve," replied his father.

"Do you?"

"That is not the question," evaded Lord Greystoke.  "It is enough that
your mother objects."

"I am going to see him," announced the boy, after a few moments of
thoughtful silence.  "I am not different from Willie Grimsby, or any
other of the fellows who have been to see him.  It did not harm them
and it will not harm me.  I could go without telling you; but I would
not do that.  So I tell you now, beforehand, that I am going to see
Ajax."

There was nothing disrespectful or defiant in the boy's tone or manner.
His was merely a dispassionate statement of facts.  His father could
scarce repress either a smile or a show of the admiration he felt for
the manly course his son had pursued.

"I admire your candor, Jack," he said.  "Permit me to be candid, as
well.  If you go to see Ajax without permission, I shall punish you.  I
have never inflicted corporal punishment upon you, but I warn you that
should you disobey your mother's wishes in this instance, I shall."

"Yes, sir," replied the boy; and then:  "I shall tell you, sir, when I
have been to see Ajax."

Mr. Moore's room was next to that of his youthful charge, and it was
the tutor's custom to have a look into the boy's each evening as the
former was about to retire.  This evening he was particularly careful
not to neglect his duty, for he had just come from a conference with
the boy's father and mother in which it had been impressed upon him
that he must exercise the greatest care to prevent Jack visiting the
music hall where Ajax was being shown.  So, when he opened the boy's
door at about half after nine, he was greatly excited, though not
entirely surprised to find the future Lord Greystoke fully dressed for
the street and about to crawl from his open bed room window.

Mr. Moore made a rapid spring across the apartment; but the waste of
energy was unnecessary, for when the boy heard him within the chamber
and realized that he had been discovered he turned back as though to
relinquish his planned adventure.

"Where were you going?" panted the excited Mr. Moore.

"I am going to see Ajax," replied the boy, quietly.

"I am astonished," cried Mr. Moore; but a moment later he was
infinitely more astonished, for the boy, approaching close to him,
suddenly seized him about the waist, lifted him from his feet and threw
him face downward upon the bed, shoving his face deep into a soft
pillow.

"Be quiet," admonished the victor, "or I'll choke you."

Mr. Moore struggled; but his efforts were in vain.  Whatever else
Tarzan of the Apes may or may not have handed down to his son he had at
least bequeathed him almost as marvelous a physique as he himself had
possessed at the same age.  The tutor was as putty in the boy's hands.
Kneeling upon him, Jack tore strips from a sheet and bound the man's
hands behind his back. Then he rolled him over and stuffed a gag of the
same material between his teeth, securing it with a strip wound about
the back of his victim's head.  All the while he talked in a low,
conversational tone.

"I am Waja, chief of the Waji," he explained, "and you are Mohammed
Dubn, the Arab sheik, who would murder my people and steal my ivory,"
and he dexterously trussed Mr. Moore's hobbled ankles up behind to meet
his hobbled wrists.  "Ah--ha!  Villain!  I have you in me power at
last.  I go; but I shall return!"  And the son of Tarzan skipped across
the room, slipped through the open window, and slid to liberty by way
of the down spout from an eaves trough.

Mr. Moore wriggled and struggled about the bed.  He was sure that he
should suffocate unless aid came quickly.  In his frenzy of terror he
managed to roll off the bed.  The pain and shock of the fall jolted him
back to something like sane consideration of his plight.  Where before
he had been unable to think intelligently because of the hysterical
fear that had claimed him he now lay quietly searching for some means
of escape from his dilemma.  It finally occurred to him that the room
in which Lord and Lady Greystoke had been sitting when he left them was
directly beneath that in which he lay upon the floor.  He knew that
some time had elapsed since he had come up stairs and that they might
be gone by this time, for it seemed to him that he had struggled about
the bed, in his efforts to free himself, for an eternity.  But the best
that he could do was to attempt to attract attention from below, and
so, after many failures, he managed to work himself into a position in
which he could tap the toe of his boot against the floor.  This he
proceeded to do at short intervals, until, after what seemed a very
long time, he was rewarded by hearing footsteps ascending the stairs,
and presently a knock upon the door.  Mr. Moore tapped vigorously with
his toe--he could not reply in any other way.  The knock was repeated
after a moment's silence.  Again Mr. Moore tapped.  Would they never
open the door!  Laboriously he rolled in the direction of succor.  If
he could get his back against the door he could then tap upon its base,
when surely he must be heard.  The knocking was repeated a little
louder, and finally a voice called:  "Mr. Jack!"

It was one of the house men--Mr. Moore recognized the fellow's voice.
He came near to bursting a blood vessel in an endeavor to scream "come
in" through the stifling gag.  After a moment the man knocked again,
quite loudly and again called the boy's name.  Receiving no reply he
turned the knob, and at the same instant a sudden recollection filled
the tutor anew with numbing terror--he had, himself, locked the door
behind him when he had entered the room.

He heard the servant try the door several times and then depart.  Upon
which Mr. Moore swooned.

In the meantime Jack was enjoying to the full the stolen pleasures of
the music hall.  He had reached the temple of mirth just as Ajax's act
was commencing, and having purchased a box seat was now leaning
breathlessly over the rail watching every move of the great ape, his
eyes wide in wonder.  The trainer was not slow to note the boy's
handsome, eager face, and as one of Ajax's biggest hits consisted in an
entry to one or more boxes during his performance, ostensibly in search
of a long-lost relative, as the trainer explained, the man realized the
effectiveness of sending him into the box with the handsome boy, who,
doubtless, would be terror stricken by proximity to the shaggy,
powerful beast.

When the time came, therefore, for the ape to return from the wings in
reply to an encore the trainer directed its attention to the boy who
chanced to be the sole occupant of the box in which he sat.  With a
spring the huge anthropoid leaped from the stage to the boy's side; but
if the trainer had looked for a laughable scene of fright he was
mistaken.  A broad smile lighted the boy's features as he laid his hand
upon the shaggy arm of his visitor.  The ape, grasping the boy by
either shoulder, peered long and earnestly into his face, while the
latter stroked his head and talked to him in a low voice.

Never had Ajax devoted so long a time to an examination of another as
he did in this instance.  He seemed troubled and not a little excited,
jabbering and mumbling to the boy, and now caressing him, as the
trainer had never seen him caress a human being before.  Presently he
clambered over into the box with him and snuggled down close to the
boy's side.  The audience was delighted; but they were still more
delighted when the trainer, the period of his act having elapsed,
attempted to persuade Ajax to leave the box.  The ape would not budge.
The manager, becoming excited at the delay, urged the trainer to
greater haste, but when the latter entered the box to drag away the
reluctant Ajax he was met by bared fangs and menacing growls.

The audience was delirious with joy.  They cheered the ape.  They
cheered the boy, and they hooted and jeered at the trainer and the
manager, which luckless individual had inadvertently shown himself and
attempted to assist the trainer.

Finally, reduced to desperation and realizing that this show of mutiny
upon the part of his valuable possession might render the animal
worthless for exhibition purposes in the future if not immediately
subdued, the trainer had hastened to his dressing room and procured a
heavy whip.  With this he now returned to the box; but when he had
threatened Ajax with it but once he found himself facing two infuriated
enemies instead of one, for the boy had leaped to his feet, and seizing
a chair was standing ready at the ape's side to defend his new found
friend.  There was no longer a smile upon his handsome face.  In his
gray eyes was an expression which gave the trainer pause, and beside
him stood the giant anthropoid growling and ready.

What might have happened, but for a timely interruption, may only be
surmised; but that the trainer would have received a severe mauling, if
nothing more, was clearly indicated by the attitudes of the two who
faced him.


It was a pale-faced man who rushed into the Greystoke library to
announce that he had found Jack's door locked and had been able to
obtain no response to his repeated knocking and calling other than a
strange tapping and the sound of what might have been a body moving
about upon the floor.

Four steps at a time John Clayton took the stairs that led to the floor
above.  His wife and the servant hurried after him.  Once he called his
son's name in a loud voice; but receiving no reply he launched his
great weight, backed by all the undiminished power of his giant
muscles, against the heavy door.  With a snapping of iron butts and a
splintering of wood the obstacle burst inward.

At its foot lay the body of the unconscious Mr. Moore, across whom it
fell with a resounding thud.  Through the opening leaped Tarzan, and a
moment later the room was flooded with light from a dozen electric
bulbs.

It was several minutes before the tutor was discovered, so completely
had the door covered him; but finally he was dragged forth, his gag and
bonds cut away, and a liberal application of cold water had hastened
returning consciousness.

"Where is Jack?" was John Clayton's first question, and then; "Who did
this?" as the memory of Rokoff and the fear of a second abduction
seized him.

Slowly Mr. Moore staggered to his feet.  His gaze wandered about the
room.  Gradually he collected his scattered wits.  The details of his
recent harrowing experience returned to him.

"I tender my resignation, sir, to take effect at once," were his first
words.  "You do not need a tutor for your son--what he needs is a wild
animal trainer."

"But where is he?" cried Lady Greystoke.

"He has gone to see Ajax."

It was with difficulty that Tarzan restrained a smile, and after
satisfying himself that the tutor was more scared than injured, he
ordered his closed car around and departed in the direction of a
certain well-known music hall.




Chapter 3


As the trainer, with raised lash, hesitated an instant at the entrance
to the box where the boy and the ape confronted him, a tall
broad-shouldered man pushed past him and entered.  As his eyes fell
upon the newcomer a slight flush mounted the boy's cheeks.

"Father!" he exclaimed.

The ape gave one look at the English lord, and then leaped toward him,
calling out in excited jabbering.  The man, his eyes going wide in
astonishment, stopped as though turned to stone.

"Akut!" he cried.

The boy looked, bewildered, from the ape to his father, and from his
father to the ape.  The trainer's jaw dropped as he listened to what
followed, for from the lips of the Englishman flowed the gutturals of
an ape that were answered in kind by the huge anthropoid that now clung
to him.

And from the wings a hideously bent and disfigured old man watched the
tableau in the box, his pock-marked features working spasmodically in
varying expressions that might have marked every sensation in the gamut
from pleasure to terror.

"Long have I looked for you, Tarzan," said Akut.  "Now that I have
found you I shall come to your jungle and live there always."

The man stroked the beast's head.  Through his mind there was running
rapidly a train of recollection that carried him far into the depths of
the primeval African forest where this huge, man-like beast had fought
shoulder to shoulder with him years before.  He saw the black Mugambi
wielding his deadly knob-stick, and beside them, with bared fangs and
bristling whiskers, Sheeta the terrible; and pressing close behind the
savage and the savage panther, the hideous apes of Akut.  The man
sighed.  Strong within him surged the jungle lust that he had thought
dead.  Ah! if he could go back even for a brief month of it, to feel
again the brush of leafy branches against his naked hide; to smell the
musty rot of dead vegetation--frankincense and myrrh to the jungle
born; to sense the noiseless coming of the great carnivora upon his
trail; to hunt and to be hunted; to kill!  The picture was alluring.
And then came another picture--a sweet-faced woman, still young and
beautiful; friends; a home; a son.  He shrugged his giant shoulders.

"It cannot be, Akut," he said; "but if you would return, I shall see
that it is done.  You could not be happy here--I may not be happy
there."

The trainer stepped forward.  The ape bared his fangs, growling.

"Go with him, Akut," said Tarzan of the Apes.  "I will come and see you
tomorrow."

The beast moved sullenly to the trainer's side.  The latter, at John
Clayton's request, told where they might be found.  Tarzan turned
toward his son.

"Come!" he said, and the two left the theater.  Neither spoke for
several minutes after they had entered the limousine.  It was the boy
who broke the silence.

"The ape knew you," he said, "and you spoke together in the ape's
tongue.  How did the ape know you, and how did you learn his language?"

And then, briefly and for the first time, Tarzan of the Apes told his
son of his early life--of the birth in the jungle, of the death of his
parents, and of how Kala, the great she ape had suckled and raised him
from infancy almost to manhood.  He told him, too, of the dangers and
the horrors of the jungle; of the great beasts that stalked one by day
and by night; of the periods of drought, and of the cataclysmic rains;
of hunger; of cold; of intense heat; of nakedness and fear and
suffering.  He told him of all those things that seem most horrible to
the creature of civilization in the hope that the knowledge of them
might expunge from the lad's mind any inherent desire for the jungle.
Yet they were the very things that made the memory of the jungle what
it was to Tarzan--that made up the composite jungle life he loved.  And
in the telling he forgot one thing--the principal thing--that the boy
at his side, listening with eager ears, was the son of Tarzan of the
Apes.

After the boy had been tucked away in bed--and without the threatened
punishment--John Clayton told his wife of the events of the evening,
and that he had at last acquainted the boy with the facts of his jungle
life.  The mother, who had long foreseen that her son must some time
know of those frightful years during which his father had roamed the
jungle, a naked, savage beast of prey, only shook her head, hoping
against hope that the lure she knew was still strong in the father's
breast had not been transmitted to his son.

Tarzan visited Akut the following day, but though Jack begged to be
allowed to accompany him he was refused.  This time Tarzan saw the
pock-marked old owner of the ape, whom he did not recognize as the wily
Paulvitch of former days.  Tarzan, influenced by Akut's pleadings,
broached the question of the ape's purchase; but Paulvitch would not
name any price, saying that he would consider the matter.

When Tarzan returned home Jack was all excitement to hear the details
of his visit, and finally suggested that his father buy the ape and
bring it home.  Lady Greystoke was horrified at the suggestion.  The
boy was insistent.  Tarzan explained that he had wished to purchase
Akut and return him to his jungle home, and to this the mother
assented.  Jack asked to be allowed to visit the ape, but again he was
met with flat refusal.  He had the address, however, which the trainer
had given his father, and two days later he found the opportunity to
elude his new tutor--who had replaced the terrified Mr. Moore--and
after a considerable search through a section of London which he had
never before visited, he found the smelly little quarters of the
pock-marked old man.  The old fellow himself replied to his knocking,
and when he stated that he had come to see Ajax, opened the door and
admitted him to the little room which he and the great ape occupied.
In former years Paulvitch had been a fastidious scoundrel; but ten
years of hideous life among the cannibals of Africa had eradicated the
last vestige of niceness from his habits.  His apparel was wrinkled and
soiled.  His hands were unwashed, his few straggling locks uncombed.
His room was a jumble of filthy disorder.  As the boy entered he saw
the great ape squatting upon the bed, the coverlets of which were a
tangled wad of filthy blankets and ill-smelling quilts.  At sight of
the youth the ape leaped to the floor and shuffled forward.  The man,
not recognizing his visitor and fearing that the ape meant mischief,
stepped between them, ordering the ape back to the bed.

"He will not hurt me," cried the boy.  "We are friends, and before, he
was my father's friend.  They knew one another in the jungle.  My
father is Lord Greystoke.  He does not know that I have come here.  My
mother forbid my coming; but I wished to see Ajax, and I will pay you
if you will let me come here often and see him."

At the mention of the boy's identity Paulvitch's eyes narrowed.  Since
he had first seen Tarzan again from the wings of the theater there had
been forming in his deadened brain the beginnings of a desire for
revenge.  It is a characteristic of the weak and criminal to attribute
to others the misfortunes that are the result of their own wickedness,
and so now it was that Alexis Paulvitch was slowly recalling the events
of his past life and as he did so laying at the door of the man whom he
and Rokoff had so assiduously attempted to ruin and murder all the
misfortunes that had befallen him in the failure of their various
schemes against their intended victim.

He saw at first no way in which he could, with safety to himself, wreak
vengeance upon Tarzan through the medium of Tarzan's son; but that
great possibilities for revenge lay in the boy was apparent to him, and
so he determined to cultivate the lad in the hope that fate would play
into his hands in some way in the future.  He told the boy all that he
knew of his father's past life in the jungle and when he found that the
boy had been kept in ignorance of all these things for so many years,
and that he had been forbidden visiting the zoological gardens; that he
had had to bind and gag his tutor to find an opportunity to come to the
music hall and see Ajax, he guessed immediately the nature of the great
fear that lay in the hearts of the boy's parents--that he might crave
the jungle as his father had craved it.

And so Paulvitch encouraged the boy to come and see him often, and
always he played upon the lad's craving for tales of the savage world
with which Paulvitch was all too familiar.  He left him alone with Akut
much, and it was not long until he was surprised to learn that the boy
could make the great beast understand him--that he had actually learned
many of the words of the primitive language of the anthropoids.

During this period Tarzan came several times to visit Paulvitch.  He
seemed anxious to purchase Ajax, and at last he told the man frankly
that he was prompted not only by a desire upon his part to return the
beast to the liberty of his native jungle; but also because his wife
feared that in some way her son might learn the whereabouts of the ape
and through his attachment for the beast become imbued with the roving
instinct which, as Tarzan explained to Paulvitch, had so influenced his
own life.

The Russian could scarce repress a smile as he listened to Lord
Greystoke's words, since scarce a half hour had passed since the time
the future Lord Greystoke had been sitting upon the disordered bed
jabbering away to Ajax with all the fluency of a born ape.

It was during this interview that a plan occurred to Paulvitch, and as
a result of it he agreed to accept a certain fabulous sum for the ape,
and upon receipt of the money to deliver the beast to a vessel that was
sailing south from Dover for Africa two days later.  He had a double
purpose in accepting Clayton's offer.  Primarily, the money
consideration influenced him strongly, as the ape was no longer a
source of revenue to him, having consistently refused to perform upon
the stage after having discovered Tarzan.  It was as though the beast
had suffered himself to be brought from his jungle home and exhibited
before thousands of curious spectators for the sole purpose of
searching out his long lost friend and master, and, having found him,
considered further mingling with the common herd of humans unnecessary.
However that may be, the fact remained that no amount of persuasion
could influence him even to show himself upon the music hall stage, and
upon the single occasion that the trainer attempted force the results
were such that the unfortunate man considered himself lucky to have
escaped with his life.  All that saved him was the accidental presence
of Jack Clayton, who had been permitted to visit the animal in the
dressing room reserved for him at the music hall, and had immediately
interfered when he saw that the savage beast meant serious mischief.

And after the money consideration, strong in the heart of the Russian
was the desire for revenge, which had been growing with constant
brooding over the failures and miseries of his life, which he
attributed to Tarzan; the latest, and by no means the least, of which
was Ajax's refusal to longer earn money for him.  The ape's refusal he
traced directly to Tarzan, finally convincing himself that the ape man
had instructed the great anthropoid to refuse to go upon the stage.

Paulvitch's naturally malign disposition was aggravated by the
weakening and warping of his mental and physical faculties through
torture and privation.  From cold, calculating, highly intelligent
perversity it had deteriorated into the indiscriminating, dangerous
menace of the mentally defective.  His plan, however, was sufficiently
cunning to at least cast a doubt upon the assertion that his mentality
was wandering.  It assured him first of the competence which Lord
Greystoke had promised to pay him for the deportation of the ape, and
then of revenge upon his benefactor through the son he idolized.  That
part of his scheme was crude and brutal--it lacked the refinement of
torture that had marked the master strokes of the Paulvitch of old,
when he had worked with that virtuoso of villainy, Nikolas Rokoff--but
it at least assured Paulvitch of immunity from responsibility, placing
that upon the ape, who would thus also be punished for his refusal
longer to support the Russian.

Everything played with fiendish unanimity into Paulvitch's hands.  As
chance would have it, Tarzan's son overheard his father relating to the
boy's mother the steps he was taking to return Akut safely to his
jungle home, and having overheard he begged them to bring the ape home
that he might have him for a play-fellow.  Tarzan would not have been
averse to this plan; but Lady Greystoke was horrified at the very
thought of it.  Jack pleaded with his mother; but all unavailingly.
She was obdurate, and at last the lad appeared to acquiesce in his
mother's decision that the ape must be returned to Africa and the boy
to school, from which he had been absent on vacation.

He did not attempt to visit Paulvitch's room again that day, but
instead busied himself in other ways.  He had always been well supplied
with money, so that when necessity demanded he had no difficulty in
collecting several hundred pounds.  Some of this money he invested in
various strange purchases which he managed to smuggle into the house,
undetected, when he returned late in the afternoon.

The next morning, after giving his father time to precede him and
conclude his business with Paulvitch, the lad hastened to the Russian's
room.  Knowing nothing of the man's true character the boy dared not
take him fully into his confidence for fear that the old fellow would
not only refuse to aid him, but would report the whole affair to his
father.  Instead, he simply asked permission to take Ajax to Dover.  He
explained that it would relieve the old man of a tiresome journey, as
well as placing a number of pounds in his pocket, for the lad purposed
paying the Russian well.

"You see," he went on, "there will be no danger of detection since I am
supposed to be leaving on an afternoon train for school.  Instead I
will come here after they have left me on board the train.  Then I can
take Ajax to Dover, you see, and arrive at school only a day late.  No
one will be the wiser, no harm will be done, and I shall have had an
extra day with Ajax before I lose him forever."

The plan fitted perfectly with that which Paulvitch had in mind.  Had
he known what further the boy contemplated he would doubtless have
entirely abandoned his own scheme of revenge and aided the boy whole
heartedly in the consummation of the lad's, which would have been
better for Paulvitch, could he have but read the future but a few short
hours ahead.

That afternoon Lord and Lady Greystoke bid their son good-bye and saw
him safely settled in a first-class compartment of the railway carriage
that would set him down at school in a few hours.  No sooner had they
left him, however, than he gathered his bags together, descended from
the compartment and sought a cab stand outside the station.  Here he
engaged a cabby to take him to the Russian's address.  It was dusk when
he arrived.  He found Paulvitch awaiting him.  The man was pacing the
floor nervously.  The ape was tied with a stout cord to the bed.  It
was the first time that Jack had ever seen Ajax thus secured.  He
looked questioningly at Paulvitch.  The man, mumbling, explained that
he believed the animal had guessed that he was to be sent away and he
feared he would attempt to escape.

Paulvitch carried another piece of cord in his hand.  There was a noose
in one end of it which he was continually playing with.  He walked back
and forth, up and down the room.  His pock-marked features were working
horribly as he talked silent to himself.  The boy had never seen him
thus--it made him uneasy.  At last Paulvitch stopped on the opposite
side of the room, far from the ape.

"Come here," he said to the lad.  "I will show you how to secure the
ape should he show signs of rebellion during the trip."

The lad laughed.  "It will not be necessary," he replied.  "Ajax will
do whatever I tell him to do."

The old man stamped his foot angrily.  "Come here, as I tell you," he
repeated.  "If you do not do as I say you shall not accompany the ape
to Dover--I will take no chances upon his escaping."

Still smiling, the lad crossed the room and stood before the Russ.

"Turn around, with your back toward me," directed the latter, "that I
may show you how to bind him quickly."

The boy did as he was bid, placing his hands behind him when Paulvitch
told him to do so.  Instantly the old man slipped the running noose
over one of the lad's wrists, took a couple of half hitches about his
other wrist, and knotted the cord.

The moment that the boy was secured the attitude of the man changed.
With an angry oath he wheeled his prisoner about, tripped him and
hurled him violently to the floor, leaping upon his breast as he fell.
From the bed the ape growled and struggled with his bonds.  The boy did
not cry out--a trait inherited from his savage sire whom long years in
the jungle following the death of his foster mother, Kala the great
ape, had taught that there was none to come to the succor of the fallen.

Paulvitch's fingers sought the lad's throat.  He grinned down horribly
into the face of his victim.

"Your father ruined me," he mumbled.  "This will pay him. He will think
that the ape did it.  I will tell him that the ape did it.  That I left
him alone for a few minutes, and that you sneaked in and the ape killed
you.  I will throw your body upon the bed after I have choked the life
from you, and when I bring your father he will see the ape squatting
over it," and the twisted fiend cackled in gloating laughter.  His
fingers closed upon the boy's throat.

Behind them the growling of the maddened beast reverberated against the
walls of the little room.  The boy paled, but no other sign of fear or
panic showed upon his countenance.  He was the son of Tarzan.  The
fingers tightened their grip upon his throat.  It was with difficulty
that he breathed, gaspingly.  The ape lunged against the stout cord
that held him.  Turning, he wrapped the cord about his hands, as a man
might have done, and surged heavily backward.  The great muscles stood
out beneath his shaggy hide.  There was a rending as of splintered
wood--the cord held, but a portion of the footboard of the bed came
away.

At the sound Paulvitch looked up.  His hideous face went white with
terror--the ape was free.

With a single bound the creature was upon him.  The man shrieked.  The
brute wrenched him from the body of the boy.  Great fingers sunk into
the man's flesh.  Yellow fangs gaped close to his throat--he struggled,
futilely--and when they closed, the soul of Alexis Paulvitch passed
into the keeping of the demons who had long been awaiting it.

The boy struggled to his feet, assisted by Akut.  For two hours under
the instructions of the former the ape worked upon the knots that
secured his friend's wrists.  Finally they gave up their secret, and
the boy was free.  Then he opened one of his bags and drew forth some
garments.  His plans had been well made.  He did not consult the beast,
which did all that he directed.  Together they slunk from the house,
but no casual observer might have noted that one of them was an ape.




Chapter 4


The killing of the friendless old Russian, Michael Sabrov, by his great
trained ape, was a matter for newspaper comment for a few days.  Lord
Greystoke read of it, and while taking special precautions not to
permit his name to become connected with the affair, kept himself well
posted as to the police search for the anthropoid.

As was true of the general public, his chief interest in the matter
centered about the mysterious disappearance of the slayer.  Or at least
this was true until he learned, several days subsequent to the tragedy,
that his son Jack had not reported at the public school en route for
which they had seen him safely ensconced in a railway carriage.  Even
then the father did not connect the disappearance of his son with the
mystery surrounding the whereabouts of the ape.  Nor was it until a
month later that careful investigation revealed the fact that the boy
had left the train before it pulled out of the station at London, and
the cab driver had been found who had driven him to the address of the
old Russian, that Tarzan of the Apes realized that Akut had in some way
been connected with the disappearance of the boy.

Beyond the moment that the cab driver had deposited his fare beside the
curb in front of the house in which the Russian had been quartered
there was no clue.  No one had seen either the boy or the ape from that
instant--at least no one who still lived.  The proprietor of the house
identified the picture of the lad as that of one who had been a
frequent visitor in the room of the old man.  Aside from this he knew
nothing.  And there, at the door of a grimy, old building in the slums
of London, the searchers came to a blank wall--baffled.

The day following the death of Alexis Paulvitch a youth accompanying
his invalid grandmother, boarded a steamer at Dover.  The old lady was
heavily veiled, and so weakened by age and sickness that she had to be
wheeled aboard the vessel in an invalid chair.

The boy would permit none but himself to wheel her, and with his own
hands assisted her from the chair to the interior of their
stateroom--and that was the last that was seen of the old lady by the
ship's company until the pair disembarked.  The boy even insisted upon
doing the work of their cabin steward, since, as he explained, his
grandmother was suffering from a nervous disposition that made the
presence of strangers extremely distasteful to her.

Outside the cabin--and none there was aboard who knew what he did in
the cabin--the lad was just as any other healthy, normal English boy
might have been.  He mingled with his fellow passengers, became a prime
favorite with the officers, and struck up numerous friendships among
the common sailors.  He was generous and unaffected, yet carried an air
of dignity and strength of character that inspired his many new friends
with admiration as well as affection for him.

Among the passengers there was an American named Condon, a noted
blackleg and crook who was "wanted" in a half dozen of the larger
cities of the United States.  He had paid little attention to the boy
until on one occasion he had seen him accidentally display a roll of
bank notes.  From then on Condon cultivated the youthful Briton.  He
learned, easily, that the boy was traveling alone with his invalid
grandmother, and that their destination was a small port on the west
coast of Africa, a little below the equator; that their name was
Billings, and that they had no friends in the little settlement for
which they were bound.  Upon the point of their purpose in visiting the
place Condon found the boy reticent, and so he did not push the
matter--he had learned all that he cared to know as it was.

Several times Condon attempted to draw the lad into a card game; but
his victim was not interested, and the black looks of several of the
other men passengers decided the American to find other means of
transferring the boy's bank roll to his own pocket.

At last came the day that the steamer dropped anchor in the lee of a
wooded promontory where a score or more of sheet-iron shacks making an
unsightly blot upon the fair face of nature proclaimed the fact that
civilization had set its heel.  Straggling upon the outskirts were the
thatched huts of natives, picturesque in their primeval savagery,
harmonizing with the background of tropical jungle and accentuating the
squalid hideousness of the white man's pioneer architecture.

The boy, leaning over the rail, was looking far beyond the man-made
town deep into the God-made jungle.  A little shiver of anticipation
tingled his spine, and then, quite without volition, he found himself
gazing into the loving eyes of his mother and the strong face of the
father which mirrored, beneath its masculine strength, a love no less
than the mother's eyes proclaimed.  He felt himself weakening in his
resolve.  Nearby one of the ship's officers was shouting orders to a
flotilla of native boats that was approaching to lighter the
consignment of the steamer's cargo destined for this tiny post.

"When does the next steamer for England touch here?" the boy asked.

"The Emanuel ought to be along most any time now," replied the officer.
"I figgered we'd find her here," and he went on with his bellowing
remarks to the dusty horde drawing close to the steamer's side.

The task of lowering the boy's grandmother over the side to a waiting
canoe was rather difficult.  The lad insisted on being always at her
side, and when at last she was safely ensconced in the bottom of the
craft that was to bear them shoreward her grandson dropped catlike
after her.  So interested was he in seeing her comfortably disposed
that he failed to notice the little package that had worked from his
pocket as he assisted in lowering the sling that contained the old
woman over the steamer's side, nor did he notice it even as it slipped
out entirely and dropped into the sea.

Scarcely had the boat containing the boy and the old woman started for
the shore than Condon hailed a canoe upon the other side of the ship,
and after bargaining with its owner finally lowered his baggage and
himself aboard.  Once ashore he kept out of sight of the two-story
atrocity that bore the legend "Hotel" to lure unsuspecting wayfarers to
its multitudinous discomforts.  It was quite dark before he ventured to
enter and arrange for accommodations.

In a back room upon the second floor the lad was explaining, not
without considerable difficulty, to his grandmother that he had decided
to return to England upon the next steamer.  He was endeavoring to make
it plain to the old lady that she might remain in Africa if she wished
but that for his part his conscience demanded that he return to his
father and mother, who doubtless were even now suffering untold sorrow
because of his absence; from which it may be assumed that his parents
had not been acquainted with the plans that he and the old lady had
made for their adventure into African wilds.

Having come to a decision the lad felt a sense of relief from the worry
that had haunted him for many sleepless nights.  When he closed his
eyes in sleep it was to dream of a happy reunion with those at home.
And as he dreamed, Fate, cruel and inexorable, crept stealthily upon
him through the dark corridor of the squalid building in which he
slept--Fate in the form of the American crook, Condon.

Cautiously the man approached the door of the lad's room.  There he
crouched listening until assured by the regular breathing of those
within that both slept.  Quietly he inserted a slim, skeleton key in
the lock of the door.  With deft fingers, long accustomed to the silent
manipulation of the bars and bolts that guarded other men's property,
Condon turned the key and the knob simultaneously.  Gentle pressure
upon the door swung it slowly inward upon its hinges.  The man entered
the room, closing the door behind him.  The moon was temporarily
overcast by heavy clouds.  The interior of the apartment was shrouded
in gloom.  Condon groped his way toward the bed.  In the far corner of
the room something moved--moved with a silent stealthiness which
transcended even the trained silence of the burglar.  Condon heard
nothing.  His attention was riveted upon the bed in which he thought to
find a young boy and his helpless, invalid grandmother.

The American sought only the bank roll.  If he could possess himself of
this without detection, well and good; but were he to meet resistance
he was prepared for that too.  The lad's clothes lay across a chair
beside the bed.  The American's fingers felt swiftly through them--the
pockets contained no roll of crisp, new notes.  Doubtless they were
beneath the pillows of the bed.  He stepped closer toward the sleeper;
his hand was already half way beneath the pillow when the thick cloud
that had obscured the moon rolled aside and the room was flooded with
light.  At the same instant the boy opened his eyes and looked straight
into those of Condon.  The man was suddenly conscious that the boy was
alone in the bed.  Then he clutched for his victim's throat.  As the
lad rose to meet him Condon heard a low growl at his back, then he felt
his wrists seized by the boy, and realized that beneath those tapering,
white fingers played muscles of steel.

He felt other hands at his throat, rough hairy hands that reached over
his shoulders from behind.  He cast a terrified glance backward, and
the hairs of his head stiffened at the sight his eyes revealed, for
grasping him from the rear was a huge, man-like ape.  The bared
fighting fangs of the anthropoid were close to his throat.  The lad
pinioned his wrists.  Neither uttered a sound.  Where was the
grandmother?  Condon's eyes swept the room in a single all-inclusive
glance.  His eyes bulged in horror at the realization of the truth
which that glance revealed.  In the power of what creatures of hideous
mystery had he placed himself!  Frantically he fought to beat off the
lad that he might turn upon the fearsome thing at his back.  Freeing
one hand he struck a savage blow at the lad's face.  His act seemed to
unloose a thousand devils in the hairy creature clinging to his throat.
Condon heard a low and savage snarl.  It was the last thing that the
American ever heard in this life.  Then he was dragged backward upon
the floor, a heavy body fell upon him, powerful teeth fastened
themselves in his jugular, his head whirled in the sudden blackness
which rims eternity--a moment later the ape rose from his prostrate
form; but Condon did not know--he was quite dead.

The lad, horrified, sprang from the bed to lean over the body of the
man.  He knew that Akut had killed in his defense, as he had killed
Michael Sabrov; but here, in savage Africa, far from home and friends
what would they do to him and his faithful ape?  The lad knew that the
penalty of murder was death.  He even knew that an accomplice might
suffer the death penalty with the principal.  Who was there who would
plead for them?  All would be against them.  It was little more than a
half-civilized community, and the chances were that they would drag
Akut and him forth in the morning and hang them both to the nearest
tree--he had read of such things being done in America, and Africa was
worse even and wilder than the great West of his mother's native land.
Yes, they would both be hanged in the morning!

Was there no escape?  He thought in silence for a few moments, and
then, with an exclamation of relief, he struck his palms together and
turned toward his clothing upon the chair.  Money would do anything!
Money would save him and Akut!  He felt for the bank roll in the pocket
in which he had been accustomed to carry it.  It was not there!  Slowly
at first and at last frantically he searched through the remaining
pockets of his clothing.  Then he dropped upon his hands and knees and
examined the floor.  Lighting the lamp he moved the bed to one side
and, inch by inch, he felt over the entire floor.  Beside the body of
Condon he hesitated, but at last he nerved himself to touch it.
Rolling it over he sought beneath it for the money.  Nor was it there.
He guessed that Condon had entered their room to rob; but he did not
believe that the man had had time to possess himself of the money;
however, as it was nowhere else, it must be upon the body of the dead
man.  Again and again he went over the room, only to return each time
to the corpse; but no where could he find the money.

He was half-frantic with despair.  What were they to do?  In the
morning they would be discovered and killed.  For all his inherited
size and strength he was, after all, only a little boy--a frightened,
homesick little boy--reasoning faultily from the meager experience of
childhood.  He could think of but a single glaring fact--they had
killed a fellow man, and they were among savage strangers, thirsting
for the blood of the first victim whom fate cast into their clutches.
This much he had gleaned from penny-dreadfuls.

And they must have money!

Again he approached the corpse.  This time resolutely.  The ape
squatted in a corner watching his young companion.  The youth commenced
to remove the American's clothing piece by piece, and, piece by piece,
he examined each garment minutely.  Even to the shoes he searched with
painstaking care, and when the last article had been removed and
scrutinized he dropped back upon the bed with dilated eyes that saw
nothing in the present--only a grim tableau of the future in which two
forms swung silently from the limb of a great tree.

How long he sat thus he did not know; but finally he was aroused by a
noise coming from the floor below.  Springing quickly to his feet he
blew out the lamp, and crossing the floor silently locked the door.
Then he turned toward the ape, his mind made up.

Last evening he had been determined to start for home at the first
opportunity, to beg the forgiveness of his parents for this mad
adventure.  Now he knew that he might never return to them.  The blood
of a fellow man was upon his hands--in his morbid reflections he had
long since ceased to attribute the death of Condon to the ape.  The
hysteria of panic had fastened the guilt upon himself.  With money he
might have bought justice; but penniless!--ah, what hope could there be
for strangers without money here?

But what had become of the money?  He tried to recall when last he had
seen it.  He could not, nor, could he, would he have been able to
account for its disappearance, for he had been entirely unconscious of
the falling of the little package from his pocket into the sea as he
clambered over the ship's side into the waiting canoe that bore him to
shore.

Now he turned toward Akut.  "Come!" he said, in the language of the
great apes.

Forgetful of the fact that he wore only a thin pajama suit he led the
way to the open window.  Thrusting his head out he listened
attentively.  A single tree grew a few feet from the window.  Nimbly
the lad sprang to its bole, clinging cat-like for an instant before he
clambered quietly to the ground below.  Close behind him came the great
ape.  Two hundred yards away a spur of the jungle ran close to the
straggling town.  Toward this the lad led the way.  None saw them, and
a moment later the jungle swallowed them, and John Clayton, future Lord
Greystoke, passed from the eyes and the knowledge of men.

It was late the following morning that a native houseman knocked upon
the door of the room that had been assigned to Mrs. Billings and her
grandson.  Receiving no response he inserted his pass key in the lock,
only to discover that another key was already there, but from the
inside.  He reported the fact to Herr Skopf, the proprietor, who at
once made his way to the second floor where he, too, pounded vigorously
upon the door.  Receiving no reply he bent to the key hole in an
attempt to look through into the room beyond.  In so doing, being
portly, he lost his balance, which necessitated putting a palm to the
floor to maintain his equilibrium.  As he did so he felt something soft
and thick and wet beneath his fingers.  He raised his open palm before
his eyes in the dim light of the corridor and peered at it.  Then he
gave a little shudder, for even in the semi-darkness he saw a dark red
stain upon his hand.  Leaping to his feet he hurled his shoulder
against the door.  Herr Skopf is a heavy man--or at least he was
then--I have not seen him for several years.  The frail door collapsed
beneath his weight, and Herr Skopf stumbled precipitately into the room
beyond.

Before him lay the greatest mystery of his life.  Upon the floor at his
feet was the dead body of a strange man.  The neck was broken and the
jugular severed as by the fangs of a wild beast.  The body was entirely
naked, the clothing being strewn about the corpse.  The old lady and
her grandson were gone.  The window was open.  They must have
disappeared through the window for the door had been locked from the
inside.

But how could the boy have carried his invalid grandmother from a
second story window to the ground?  It was preposterous.  Again Herr
Skopf searched the small room.  He noticed that the bed was pulled well
away from the wall--why?  He looked beneath it again for the third or
fourth time.  The two were gone, and yet his judgment told him that the
old lady could not have gone without porters to carry her down as they
had carried her up the previous day.

Further search deepened the mystery.  All the clothing of the two was
still in the room--if they had gone then they must have gone naked or
in their night clothes.  Herr Skopf shook his head; then he scratched
it.  He was baffled.  He had never heard of Sherlock Holmes or he would
have lost no time in invoking the aid of that celebrated sleuth, for
here was a real mystery:  An old woman--an invalid who had to be
carried from the ship to her room in the hotel--and a handsome lad, her
grandson, had entered a room on the second floor of his hostelry the
day before.  They had had their evening meal served in their room--that
was the last that had been seen of them.  At nine the following morning
the corpse of a strange man had been the sole occupant of that room.
No boat had left the harbor in the meantime--there was not a railroad
within hundreds of miles--there was no other white settlement that the
two could reach under several days of arduous marching accompanied by a
well-equipped safari.  They had simply vanished into thin air, for the
native he had sent to inspect the ground beneath the open window had
just returned to report that there was no sign of a footstep there, and
what sort of creatures were they who could have dropped that distance
to the soft turf without leaving spoor?  Herr Skopf shuddered.  Yes, it
was a great mystery--there was something uncanny about the whole
thing--he hated to think about it, and he dreaded the coming of night.

It was a great mystery to Herr Skopf--and, doubtless, still is.




Chapter 5


Captain Armand Jacot of the Foreign Legion sat upon an outspread saddle
blanket at the foot of a stunted palm tree.  His broad shoulders and
his close-cropped head rested in luxurious ease against the rough bole
of the palm.  His long legs were stretched straight before him
overlapping the meager blanket, his spurs buried in the sandy soil of
the little desert oasis.  The captain was taking his ease after a long
day of weary riding across the shifting sands of the desert.

Lazily he puffed upon his cigarette and watched his orderly who was
preparing his evening meal.  Captain Armand Jacot was well satisfied
with himself and the world.  A little to his right rose the noisy
activity of his troop of sun-tanned veterans, released for the time
from the irksome trammels of discipline, relaxing tired muscles,
laughing, joking, and smoking as they, too, prepared to eat after a
twelve-hour fast.  Among them, silent and taciturn, squatted five
white-robed Arabs, securely bound and under heavy guard.

It was the sight of these that filled Captain Armand Jacot with the
pleasurable satisfaction of a duty well-performed.  For a long, hot,
gaunt month he and his little troop had scoured the places of the
desert waste in search of a band of marauders to the sin-stained
account of which were charged innumerable thefts of camels, horses, and
goats, as well as murders enough to have sent the whole unsavory gang
to the guillotine several times over.

A week before, he had come upon them.  In the ensuing battle he had
lost two of his own men, but the punishment inflicted upon the
marauders had been severe almost to extinction.  A half dozen, perhaps,
had escaped; but the balance, with the exception of the five prisoners,
had expiated their crimes before the nickel jacketed bullets of the
legionaries.  And, best of all, the ring leader, Achmet ben Houdin, was
among the prisoners.

From the prisoners Captain Jacot permitted his mind to traverse the
remaining miles of sand to the little garrison post where, upon the
morrow, he should find awaiting him with eager welcome his wife and
little daughter.  His eyes softened to the memory of them, as they
always did.  Even now he could see the beauty of the mother reflected
in the childish lines of little Jeanne's face, and both those faces
would be smiling up into his as he swung from his tired mount late the
following afternoon.  Already he could feel a soft cheek pressed close
to each of his--velvet against leather.

His reverie was broken in upon by the voice of a sentry summoning a
non-commissioned officer.  Captain Jacot raised his eyes.  The sun had
not yet set; but the shadows of the few trees huddled about the water
hole and of his men and their horses stretched far away into the east
across the now golden sand.  The sentry was pointing in this direction,
and the corporal, through narrowed lids, was searching the distance.
Captain Jacot rose to his feet.  He was not a man content to see
through the eyes of others.  He must see for himself.  Usually he saw
things long before others were aware that there was anything to see--a
trait that had won for him the sobriquet of Hawk.  Now he saw, just
beyond the long shadows, a dozen specks rising and falling among the
sands.  They disappeared and reappeared, but always they grew larger.
Jacot recognized them immediately.  They were horsemen--horsemen of the
desert.  Already a sergeant was running toward him.  The entire camp
was straining its eyes into the distance.  Jacot gave a few terse
orders to the sergeant who saluted, turned upon his heel and returned
to the men.  Here he gathered a dozen who saddled their horses, mounted
and rode out to meet the strangers.  The remaining men disposed
themselves in readiness for instant action.  It was not entirely beyond
the range of possibilities that the horsemen riding thus swiftly toward
the camp might be friends of the prisoners bent upon the release of
their kinsmen by a sudden attack.  Jacot doubted this, however, since
the strangers were evidently making no attempt to conceal their
presence.  They were galloping rapidly toward the camp in plain view of
all.  There might be treachery lurking beneath their fair appearance;
but none who knew The Hawk would be so gullible as to hope to trap him
thus.

The sergeant with his detail met the Arabs two hundred yards from the
camp.  Jacot could see him in conversation with a tall, white-robed
figure--evidently the leader of the band.  Presently the sergeant and
this Arab rode side by side toward camp.  Jacot awaited them.  The two
reined in and dismounted before him.

"Sheik Amor ben Khatour," announced the sergeant by way of introduction.

Captain Jacot eyed the newcomer.  He was acquainted with nearly every
principal Arab within a radius of several hundred miles.  This man he
never had seen.  He was a tall, weather beaten, sour looking man of
sixty or more.  His eyes were narrow and evil.  Captain Jacot did not
relish his appearance.

"Well?" he asked, tentatively.

The Arab came directly to the point.

"Achmet ben Houdin is my sister's son," he said.  "If you will give him
into my keeping I will see that he sins no more against the laws of the
French."

Jacot shook his head.  "That cannot be," he replied.  "I must take him
back with me.  He will be properly and fairly tried by a civil court.
If he is innocent he will be released."

"And if he is not innocent?" asked the Arab.

"He is charged with many murders.  For any one of these, if he is
proved guilty, he will have to die."

The Arab's left hand was hidden beneath his burnous.  Now he withdrew
it disclosing a large goatskin purse, bulging and heavy with coins.  He
opened the mouth of the purse and let a handful of the contents trickle
into the palm of his right hand--all were pieces of good French gold.
From the size of the purse and its bulging proportions Captain Jacot
concluded that it must contain a small fortune.  Sheik Amor ben Khatour
dropped the spilled gold pieces one by one back into the purse.  Jacot
was eyeing him narrowly.  They were alone.  The sergeant, having
introduced the visitor, had withdrawn to some little distance--his back
was toward them.  Now the sheik, having returned all the gold pieces,
held the bulging purse outward upon his open palm toward Captain Jacot.

"Achmet ben Houdin, my sister's son, MIGHT escape tonight," he said.
"Eh?"

Captain Armand Jacot flushed to the roots of his close-cropped hair.
Then he went very white and took a half-step toward the Arab.  His
fists were clenched.  Suddenly he thought better of whatever impulse
was moving him.

"Sergeant!" he called.  The non-commissioned officer hurried toward
him, saluting as his heels clicked together before his superior.

"Take this black dog back to his people," he ordered.  "See that they
leave at once.  Shoot the first man who comes within range of camp
tonight."

Sheik Amor ben Khatour drew himself up to his full height.  His evil
eyes narrowed.  He raised the bag of gold level with the eyes of the
French officer.

"You will pay more than this for the life of Achmet ben Houdin, my
sister's son," he said.  "And as much again for the name that you have
called me and a hundred fold in sorrow in the bargain."

"Get out of here!" growled Captain Armand Jacot, "before I kick you
out."

All of this happened some three years before the opening of this tale.
The trail of Achmet ben Houdin and his accomplices is a matter of
record--you may verify it if you care to.  He met the death he
deserved, and he met it with the stoicism of the Arab.

A month later little Jeanne Jacot, the seven-year-old daughter of
Captain Armand Jacot, mysteriously disappeared.  Neither the wealth of
her father and mother, or all the powerful resources of the great
republic were able to wrest the secret of her whereabouts from the
inscrutable desert that had swallowed her and her abductor.

A reward of such enormous proportions was offered that many adventurers
were attracted to the hunt.  This was no case for the modern detective
of civilization, yet several of these threw themselves into the
search--the bones of some are already bleaching beneath the African sun
upon the silent sands of the Sahara.

Two Swedes, Carl Jenssen and Sven Malbihn, after three years of
following false leads at last gave up the search far to the south of
the Sahara to turn their attention to the more profitable business of
ivory poaching.  In a great district they were already known for their
relentless cruelty and their greed for ivory.  The natives feared and
hated them.  The European governments in whose possessions they worked
had long sought them; but, working their way slowly out of the north
they had learned many things in the no-man's-land south of the Sahara
which gave them immunity from capture through easy avenues of escape
that were unknown to those who pursued them.  Their raids were sudden
and swift.  They seized ivory and retreated into the trackless wastes
of the north before the guardians of the territory they raped could be
made aware of their presence.  Relentlessly they slaughtered elephants
themselves as well as stealing ivory from the natives.  Their following
consisted of a hundred or more renegade Arabs and Negro slaves--a
fierce, relentless band of cut-throats.  Remember them--Carl Jenssen
and Sven Malbihn, yellow-bearded, Swedish giants--for you will meet
them later.


In the heart of the jungle, hidden away upon the banks of a small
unexplored tributary of a large river that empties into the Atlantic
not so far from the equator, lay a small, heavily palisaded village.
Twenty palm-thatched, beehive huts sheltered its black population,
while a half-dozen goat skin tents in the center of the clearing housed
the score of Arabs who found shelter here while, by trading and
raiding, they collected the cargoes which their ships of the desert
bore northward twice each year to the market of Timbuktu.

Playing before one of the Arab tents was a little girl of ten--a
black-haired, black-eyed little girl who, with her nut-brown skin and
graceful carriage looked every inch a daughter of the desert.  Her
little fingers were busily engaged in fashioning a skirt of grasses for
a much-disheveled doll which a kindly disposed slave had made for her a
year or two before.  The head of the doll was rudely chipped from
ivory, while the body was a rat skin stuffed with grass.  The arms and
legs were bits of wood, perforated at one end and sewn to the rat skin
torso.  The doll was quite hideous and altogether disreputable and
soiled, but Meriem thought it the most beautiful and adorable thing in
the whole world, which is not so strange in view of the fact that it
was the only object within that world upon which she might bestow her
confidence and her love.

Everyone else with whom Meriem came in contact was, almost without
exception, either indifferent to her or cruel.  There was, for example,
the old black hag who looked after her, Mabunu--toothless, filthy and
ill tempered.  She lost no opportunity to cuff the little girl, or even
inflict minor tortures upon her, such as pinching, or, as she had twice
done, searing the tender flesh with hot coals.  And there was The
Sheik, her father.  She feared him more than she did Mabunu.  He often
scolded her for nothing, quite habitually terminating his tirades by
cruelly beating her, until her little body was black and blue.

But when she was alone she was happy, playing with Geeka, or decking
her hair with wild flowers, or making ropes of grasses.  She was always
busy and always singing--when they left her alone.  No amount of
cruelty appeared sufficient to crush the innate happiness and sweetness
from her full little heart.  Only when The Sheik was near was she quiet
and subdued.  Him she feared with a fear that was at times almost
hysterical terror. She feared the gloomy jungle too--the cruel jungle
that surrounded the little village with chattering monkeys and
screaming birds by day and the roaring and coughing and moaning of the
carnivora by night.  Yes, she feared the jungle; but so much more did
she fear The Sheik that many times it was in her childish head to run
away, out into the terrible jungle forever rather than longer to face
the ever present terror of her father.

As she sat there this day before The Sheik's goatskin tent, fashioning
a skirt of grasses for Geeka, The Sheik appeared suddenly approaching.
Instantly the look of happiness faded from the child's face.  She
shrunk aside in an attempt to scramble from the path of the
leathern-faced old Arab; but she was not quick enough.  With a brutal
kick the man sent her sprawling upon her face, where she lay quite
still, tearless but trembling.  Then, with an oath at her, the man
passed into the tent.  The old, black hag shook with appreciative
laughter, disclosing an occasional and lonesome yellow fang.

When she was sure The Sheik had gone, the little girl crawled to the
shady side of the tent, where she lay quite still, hugging Geeka close
to her breast, her little form racked at long intervals with choking
sobs.  She dared not cry aloud, since that would have brought The Sheik
upon her again.  The anguish in her little heart was not alone the
anguish of physical pain; but that infinitely more pathetic anguish--of
love denied a childish heart that yearns for love.

Little Meriem could scarce recall any other existence than that of the
stern cruelty of The Sheik and Mabunu.  Dimly, in the back of her
childish memory there lurked a blurred recollection of a gentle mother;
but Meriem was not sure but that even this was but a dream picture
induced by her own desire for the caresses she never received, but
which she lavished upon the much loved Geeka.  Never was such a spoiled
child as Geeka.  Its little mother, far from fashioning her own conduct
after the example set her by her father and nurse, went to the extreme
of indulgence.  Geeka was kissed a thousand times a day.  There was
play in which Geeka was naughty; but the little mother never punished.
Instead, she caressed and fondled; her attitude influenced solely by
her own pathetic desire for love.

Now, as she pressed Geeka close to her, her sobs lessened gradually,
until she was able to control her voice, and pour out her misery into
the ivory ear of her only confidante.

"Geeka loves Meriem," she whispered.  "Why does The Sheik, my father,
not love me, too?  Am I so naughty?  I try to be good; but I never know
why he strikes me, so I cannot tell what I have done which displeases
him.  Just now he kicked me and hurt me so, Geeka; but I was only
sitting before the tent making a skirt for you.  That must be wicked,
or he would not have kicked me for it.  But why is it wicked, Geeka?
Oh dear!  I do not know, I do not know.  I wish, Geeka, that I were
dead.  Yesterday the hunters brought in the body of El Adrea.  El Adrea
was quite dead.  No more will he slink silently upon his unsuspecting
prey.  No more will his great head and his maned shoulders strike
terror to the hearts of the grass eaters at the drinking ford by night.
No more will his thundering roar shake the ground.  El Adrea is dead.
They beat his body terribly when it was brought into the village; but
El Adrea did not mind.  He did not feel the blows, for he was dead.
When I am dead, Geeka, neither shall I feel the blows of Mabunu, or the
kicks of The Sheik, my father.  Then shall I be happy.  Oh, Geeka, how
I wish that I were dead!"

If Geeka contemplated a remonstrance it was cut short by sounds of
altercation beyond the village gates.  Meriem listened.  With the
curiosity of childhood she would have liked to have run down there and
learn what it was that caused the men to talk so loudly.  Others of the
village were already trooping in the direction of the noise.  But
Meriem did not dare.  The Sheik would be there, doubtless, and if he
saw her it would be but another opportunity to abuse her, so Meriem lay
still and listened.

Presently she heard the crowd moving up the street toward The Sheik's
tent.  Cautiously she stuck her little head around the edge of the
tent.  She could not resist the temptation, for the sameness of the
village life was monotonous, and she craved diversion.  What she saw
was two strangers--white men.  They were alone, but as they approached
she learned from the talk of the natives that surrounded them that they
possessed a considerable following that was camped outside the village.
They were coming to palaver with The Sheik.

The old Arab met them at the entrance to his tent.  His eyes narrowed
wickedly when they had appraised the newcomers.  They stopped before
him, exchanging greetings.  They had come to trade for ivory they said.
The Sheik grunted.  He had no ivory.  Meriem gasped.  She knew that in
a near-by hut the great tusks were piled almost to the roof.  She poked
her little head further forward to get a better view of the strangers.
How white their skins!  How yellow their great beards!

Suddenly one of them turned his eyes in her direction.  She tried to
dodge back out of sight, for she feared all men; but he saw her.
Meriem noticed the look of almost shocked surprise that crossed his
face.  The Sheik saw it too, and guessed the cause of it.

"I have no ivory," he repeated.  "I do not wish to trade.  Go away.  Go
now."

He stepped from his tent and almost pushed the strangers about in the
direction of the gates.  They demurred, and then The Sheik threatened.
It would have been suicide to have disobeyed, so the two men turned and
left the village, making their way immediately to their own camp.

The Sheik returned to his tent; but he did not enter it.  Instead he
walked to the side where little Meriem lay close to the goat skin wall,
very frightened.  The Sheik stooped and clutched her by the arm.
Viciously he jerked her to her feet, dragged her to the entrance of the
tent, and shoved her viciously within.  Following her he again seized
her, beating her ruthlessly.

"Stay within!" he growled.  "Never let the strangers see thy face.
Next time you show yourself to strangers I shall kill you!"

With a final vicious cuff he knocked the child into a far corner of the
tent, where she lay stifling her moans, while The Sheik paced to and
fro muttering to himself.  At the entrance sat Mabunu, muttering and
chuckling.

In the camp of the strangers one was speaking rapidly to the other.

"There is no doubt of it, Malbihn," he was saying.  "Not the slightest;
but why the old scoundrel hasn't claimed the reward long since is what
puzzles me."

"There are some things dearer to an Arab, Jenssen, than money,"
returned the first speaker--"revenge is one of them."

"Anyhow it will not harm to try the power of gold," replied Jenssen.

Malbihn shrugged.

"Not on The Sheik," he said.  "We might try it on one of his people;
but The Sheik will not part with his revenge for gold.  To offer it to
him would only confirm his suspicions that we must have awakened when
we were talking to him before his tent.  If we got away with our lives,
then, we should be fortunate."

"Well, try bribery, then," assented Jenssen.

But bribery failed--grewsomely.  The tool they selected after a stay of
several days in their camp outside the village was a tall, old headman
of The Sheik's native contingent.  He fell to the lure of the shining
metal, for he had lived upon the coast and knew the power of gold.  He
promised to bring them what they craved, late that night.

Immediately after dark the two white men commenced to make arrangements
to break camp.  By midnight all was prepared.  The porters lay beside
their loads, ready to swing them aloft at a moment's notice.  The armed
askaris loitered between the balance of the safari and the Arab
village, ready to form a rear guard for the retreat that was to begin
the moment that the head man brought that which the white masters
awaited.

Presently there came the sound of footsteps along the path from the
village.  Instantly the askaris and the whites were on the alert.  More
than a single man was approaching.  Jenssen stepped forward and
challenged the newcomers in a low whisper.

"Who comes?" he queried.

"Mbeeda," came the reply.

Mbeeda was the name of the traitorous head man.  Jenssen was satisfied,
though he wondered why Mbeeda had brought others with him.  Presently
he understood.  The thing they fetched lay upon a litter borne by two
men.  Jenssen cursed beneath his breath.  Could the fool be bringing
them a corpse?  They had paid for a living prize!

The bearers came to a halt before the white men.

"This has your gold purchased," said one of the two.  They set the
litter down, turned and vanished into the darkness toward the village.
Malbihn looked at Jenssen, a crooked smile twisting his lips.  The
thing upon the litter was covered with a piece of cloth.

"Well?" queried the latter.  "Raise the covering and see what you have
bought.  Much money shall we realize on a corpse--especially after the
six months beneath the burning sun that will be consumed in carrying it
to its destination!"

"The fool should have known that we desired her alive," grumbled
Malbihn, grasping a corner of the cloth and jerking the cover from the
thing that lay upon the litter.

At sight of what lay beneath both men stepped back--involuntary oaths
upon their lips--for there before them lay the dead body of Mbeeda, the
faithless head man.

Five minutes later the safari of Jenssen and Malbihn was forcing its
way rapidly toward the west, nervous askaris guarding the rear from the
attack they momentarily expected.




Chapter 6


His first night in the jungle was one which the son of Tarzan held
longest in his memory.  No savage carnivora menaced him.  There was
never a sign of hideous barbarian.  Or, if there were, the boy's
troubled mind took no cognizance of them.  His conscience was harassed
by the thought of his mother's suffering.  Self-blame plunged him into
the depths of misery.  The killing of the American caused him little or
no remorse.  The fellow had earned his fate.  Jack's regret on this
score was due mainly to the effect which the death of Condon had had
upon his own plans.  Now he could not return directly to his parents as
he had planned.  Fear of the primitive, borderland law, of which he had
read highly colored, imaginary tales, had thrust him into the jungle a
fugitive.  He dared not return to the coast at this point--not that he
was so greatly influenced through personal fear as from a desire to
shield his father and mother from further sorrow and from the shame of
having their honored name dragged through the sordid degradation of a
murder trial.

With returning day the boy's spirits rose.  With the rising sun rose
new hope within his breast.  He would return to civilization by another
way.  None would guess that he had been connected with the killing of
the stranger in the little out-of-the-way trading post upon a remote
shore.

Crouched close to the great ape in the crotch of a tree the boy had
shivered through an almost sleepless night.  His light pajamas had been
but little protection from the chill dampness of the jungle, and only
that side of him which was pressed against the warm body of his shaggy
companion approximated to comfort.  And so he welcomed the rising sun
with its promise of warmth as well as light--the blessed sun, dispeller
of physical and mental ills.

He shook Akut into wakefulness.

"Come," he said.  "I am cold and hungry.  We will search for food, out
there in the sunlight," and he pointed to an open plain, dotted with
stunted trees and strewn with jagged rock.

The boy slid to the ground as he spoke, but the ape first looked
carefully about, sniffing the morning air.  Then, satisfied that no
danger lurked near, he descended slowly to the ground beside the boy.

"Numa, and Sabor his mate, feast upon those who descend first and look
afterward, while those who look first and descend afterward live to
feast themselves."  Thus the old ape imparted to the son of Tarzan the
boy's first lesson in jungle lore.  Side by side they set off across
the rough plain, for the boy wished first to be warm.  The ape showed
him the best places to dig for rodents and worms; but the lad only
gagged at the thought of devouring the repulsive things.  Some eggs
they found, and these he sucked raw, as also he ate roots and tubers
which Akut unearthed.  Beyond the plain and across a low bluff they
came upon water--brackish, ill-smelling stuff in a shallow water hole,
the sides and bottom of which were trampled by the feet of many beasts.
A herd of zebra galloped away as they approached.

The lad was too thirsty by now to cavil at anything even remotely
resembling water, so he drank his fill while Akut stood with raised
head, alert for any danger.  Before the ape drank he cautioned the boy
to be watchful; but as he drank he raised his head from time to time to
cast a quick glance toward a clump of bushes a hundred yards away upon
the opposite side of the water hole.  When he had done he rose and
spoke to the boy, in the language that was their common heritage--the
tongue of the great apes.

"There is no danger near?" he asked.

"None," replied the boy.  "I saw nothing move while you drank."

"Your eyes will help you but little in the jungle," said the ape.

"Here, if you would live, you must depend upon your ears and your nose
but most upon your nose.  When we came down to drink I knew that no
danger lurked near upon this side of the water hole, for else the
zebras would have discovered it and fled before we came; but upon the
other side toward which the wind blows danger might lie concealed.  We
could not smell it for its scent is being blown in the other direction,
and so I bent my ears and eyes down wind where my nose cannot travel."

"And you found--nothing?" asked the lad, with a laugh.

"I found Numa crouching in that clump of bushes where the tall grasses
grow," and Akut pointed.

"A lion?" exclaimed the boy.  "How do you know?  I can see nothing."

"Numa is there, though," replied the great ape.  "First I heard him
sigh.  To you the sigh of Numa may sound no different from the other
noises which the wind makes among the grasses and the trees; but later
you must learn to know the sigh of Numa.  Then I watched and at last I
saw the tall grasses moving at one point to a force other than the
force of the wind.  See, they are spread there upon either side of
Numa's great body, and as he breathes--you see?  You see the little
motion at either side that is not caused by the wind--the motion that
none of the other grasses have?"

The boy strained his eyes--better eyes than the ordinary boy
inherits--and at last he gave a little exclamation of discovery.

"Yes," he said, "I see.  He lies there," and he pointed.  "His head is
toward us.  Is he watching us?"

"Numa is watching us," replied Akut, "but we are in little danger,
unless we approach too close, for he is lying upon his kill.  His belly
is almost full, or we should hear him crunching the bones.  He is
watching us in silence merely from curiosity.  Presently he will resume
his feeding or he will rise and come down to the water for a drink.  As
he neither fears or desires us he will not try to hide his presence
from us; but now is an excellent time to learn to know Numa, for you
must learn to know him well if you would live long in the jungle.
Where the great apes are many Numa leaves us alone.  Our fangs are long
and strong, and we can fight; but when we are alone and he is hungry we
are no match for him.  Come, we will circle him and catch his scent.
The sooner you learn to know it the better; but keep close to the
trees, as we go around him, for Numa often does that which he is least
expected to do.  And keep your ears and your eyes and your nose open.
Remember always that there may be an enemy behind every bush, in every
tree and amongst every clump of jungle grass.  While you are avoiding
Numa do not run into the jaws of Sabor, his mate.  Follow me," and Akut
set off in a wide circle about the water hole and the crouching lion.

The boy followed close upon his heels, his every sense upon the alert,
his nerves keyed to the highest pitch of excitement.  This was life!
For the instant he forgot his resolutions of a few minutes past to
hasten to the coast at some other point than that at which he had
landed and make his way immediately back to London.  He thought now
only of the savage joy of living, and of pitting one's wits and prowess
against the wiles and might of the savage jungle brood which haunted
the broad plains and the gloomy forest aisles of the great, untamed
continent.  He knew no fear.  His father had had none to transmit to
him; but honor and conscience he did have and these were to trouble him
many times as they battled with his inherent love of freedom for
possession of his soul.

They had passed but a short distance to the rear of Numa when the boy
caught the unpleasant odor of the carnivore.  His face lighted with a
smile.  Something told him that he would have known that scent among a
myriad of others even if Akut had not told him that a lion lay near.
There was a strange familiarity--a weird familiarity in it that made
the short hairs rise at the nape of his neck, and brought his upper lip
into an involuntary snarl that bared his fighting fangs.  There was a
sense of stretching of the skin about his ears, for all the world as
though those members were flattening back against his skull in
preparation for deadly combat.  His skin tingled.  He was aglow with a
pleasurable sensation that he never before had known.  He was, upon the
instant, another creature--wary, alert, ready.  Thus did the scent of
Numa, the lion, transform the boy into a beast.

He had never seen a lion--his mother had gone to great pains to prevent
it.  But he had devoured countless pictures of them, and now he was
ravenous to feast his eyes upon the king of beasts in the flesh.  As he
trailed Akut he kept an eye cocked over one shoulder, rearward, in the
hope that Numa might rise from his kill and reveal himself.  Thus it
happened that he dropped some little way behind Akut, and the next he
knew he was recalled suddenly to a contemplation of other matters than
the hidden Numa by a shrill scream of warning from the Ape.  Turning
his eyes quickly in the direction of his companion, the boy saw that,
standing in the path directly before him, which sent tremors of
excitement racing along every nerve of his body.  With body
half-merging from a clump of bushes in which she must have lain hidden
stood a sleek and beautiful lioness.  Her yellow-green eyes were round
and staring, boring straight into the eyes of the boy.  Not ten paces
separated them.  Twenty paces behind the lioness stood the great ape,
bellowing instructions to the boy and hurling taunts at the lioness in
an evident effort to attract her attention from the lad while he gained
the shelter of a near-by tree.

But Sabor was not to be diverted.  She had her eyes upon the lad.  He
stood between her and her mate, between her and the kill.  It was
suspicious.  Probably he had ulterior designs upon her lord and master
or upon the fruits of their hunting.  A lioness is short tempered.
Akut's bellowing annoyed her.  She uttered a little rumbling growl,
taking a step toward the boy.

"The tree!" screamed Akut.

The boy turned and fled, and at the same instant the lioness charged.
The tree was but a few paces away.  A limb hung ten feet from the
ground, and as the boy leaped for it the lioness leaped for him.  Like
a monkey he pulled himself up and to one side.  A great forepaw caught
him a glancing blow at the hips--just grazing him.  One curved talon
hooked itself into the waist band of his pajama trousers, ripping them
from him as the lioness sped by.  Half-naked the lad drew himself to
safety as the beast turned and leaped for him once more.

Akut, from a near-by tree, jabbered and scolded, calling the lioness
all manner of foul names.  The boy, patterning his conduct after that
of his preceptor, unstoppered the vials of his invective upon the head
of the enemy, until in realization of the futility of words as weapons
he bethought himself of something heavier to hurl.  There was nothing
but dead twigs and branches at hand, but these he flung at the
upturned, snarling face of Sabor just as his father had before him
twenty years ago, when as a boy he too had taunted and tantalized the
great cats of the jungle.

The lioness fretted about the bole of the tree for a short time; but
finally, either realizing the uselessness of her vigil, or prompted by
the pangs of hunger, she stalked majestically away and disappeared in
the brush that hid her lord, who had not once shown himself during the
altercation.

Freed from their retreats Akut and the boy came to the ground, to take
up their interrupted journey once more.  The old ape scolded the lad
for his carelessness.

"Had you not been so intent upon the lion behind you you might have
discovered the lioness much sooner than you did."

"But you passed right by her without seeing her," retorted the boy.

Akut was chagrined.

"It is thus," he said, "that jungle folk die.  We go cautiously for a
lifetime, and then, just for an instant, we forget, and--" he ground
his teeth in mimicry of the crunching of great jaws in flesh.  "It is a
lesson," he resumed.  "You have learned that you may not for too long
keep your eyes and your ears and your nose all bent in the same
direction."

That night the son of Tarzan was colder than he ever had been in all
his life.  The pajama trousers had not been heavy; but they had been
much heavier than nothing.  And the next day he roasted in the hot sun,
for again their way led much across wide and treeless plains.

It was still in the boy's mind to travel to the south, and circle back
to the coast in search of another outpost of civilization.  He had said
nothing of this plan to Akut, for he knew that the old ape would look
with displeasure upon any suggestion that savored of separation.

For a month the two wandered on, the boy learning rapidly the laws of
the jungle; his muscles adapting themselves to the new mode of life
that had been thrust upon them.  The thews of the sire had been
transmitted to the son--it needed only the hardening of use to develop
them.  The lad found that it came quite naturally to him to swing
through the trees.  Even at great heights he never felt the slightest
dizziness, and when he had caught the knack of the swing and the
release, he could hurl himself through space from branch to branch with
even greater agility than the heavier Akut.

And with exposure came a toughening and hardening of his smooth, white
skin, browning now beneath the sun and wind.  He had removed his pajama
jacket one day to bathe in a little stream that was too small to harbor
crocodiles, and while he and Akut had been disporting themselves in the
cool waters a monkey had dropped down from the over hanging trees,
snatched up the boy's single remaining article of civilized garmenture,
and scampered away with it.

For a time Jack was angry; but when he had been without the jacket for
a short while he began to realize that being half-clothed is infinitely
more uncomfortable than being entirely naked.  Soon he did not miss his
clothing in the least, and from that he came to revel in the freedom of
his unhampered state.  Occasionally a smile would cross his face as he
tried to imagine the surprise of his schoolmates could they but see him
now.  They would envy him.  Yes, how they would envy him.  He felt
sorry for them at such times, and again as he thought of them amid
luxuries and comforts of their English homes, happy with their fathers
and mothers, a most uncomfortable lump would arise into the boy's
throat, and he would see a vision of his mother's face through a blur
of mist that came unbidden to his eyes.  Then it was that he urged Akut
onward, for now they were headed westward toward the coast.  The old
ape thought that they were searching for a tribe of his own kind, nor
did the boy disabuse his mind of this belief.  It would do to tell Akut
of his real plans when they had come within sight of civilization.

One day as they were moving slowly along beside a river they came
unexpectedly upon a native village.  Some children were playing beside
the water.  The boy's heart leaped within his breast at sight of
them--for over a month he had seen no human being.  What if these were
naked savages?  What if their skins were black?  Were they not
creatures fashioned in the mold of their Maker, as was he?  They were
his brothers and sisters!  He started toward them.  With a low warning
Akut laid a hand upon his arm to hold him back.  The boy shook himself
free, and with a shout of greeting ran forward toward the ebon players.

The sound of his voice brought every head erect.  Wide eyes viewed him
for an instant, and then, with screams of terror, the children turned
and fled toward the village.  At their heels ran their mothers, and
from the village gate, in response to the alarm, came a score of
warriors, hastily snatched spears and shields ready in their hands.

At sight of the consternation he had wrought the boy halted.  The glad
smile faded from his face as with wild shouts and menacing gestures the
warriors ran toward him.  Akut was calling to him from behind to turn
and flee, telling him that the blacks would kill him.  For a moment he
stood watching them coming, then he raised his hand with the palm
toward them in signal for them to halt, calling out at the same time
that he came as a friend--that he had only wanted to play with their
children.  Of course they did not understand a word that he addressed
to them, and their answer was what any naked creature who had run
suddenly out of the jungle upon their women and children might have
expected--a shower of spears.  The missiles struck all about the boy,
but none touched him.  Again his spine tingled and the short hairs
lifted at the nape of his neck and along the top of his scalp.  His
eyes narrowed.  Sudden hatred flared in them to wither the expression
of glad friendliness that had lighted them but an instant before.  With
a low snarl, quite similar to that of a baffled beast, he turned and
ran into the jungle.  There was Akut awaiting him in a tree.  The ape
urged him to hasten in flight, for the wise old anthropoid knew that
they two, naked and unarmed, were no match for the sinewy black
warriors who would doubtless make some sort of search for them through
the jungle.

But a new power moved the son of Tarzan.  He had come with a boy's glad
and open heart to offer his friendship to these people who were human
beings like himself.  He had been met with suspicion and spears.  They
had not even listened to him.  Rage and hatred consumed him.  When Akut
urged speed he held back.  He wanted to fight, yet his reason made it
all too plain that it would be but a foolish sacrifice of his life to
meet these armed men with his naked hands and his teeth--already the
boy thought of his teeth, of his fighting fangs, when possibility of
combat loomed close.

Moving slowly through the trees he kept his eyes over his shoulder,
though he no longer neglected the possibilities of other dangers which
might lurk on either hand or ahead--his experience with the lioness did
not need a repetition to insure the permanency of the lesson it had
taught.  Behind he could hear the savages advancing with shouts and
cries.  He lagged further behind until the pursuers were in sight.
They did not see him, for they were not looking among the branches of
the trees for human quarry.  The lad kept just ahead of them.  For a
mile perhaps they continued the search, and then they turned back
toward the village.  Here was the boy's opportunity, that for which he
had been waiting, while the hot blood of revenge coursed through his
veins until he saw his pursuers through a scarlet haze.

When they turned back he turned and followed them.  Akut was no longer
in sight.  Thinking that the boy followed he had gone on further ahead.
He had no wish to tempt fate within range of those deadly spears.
Slinking silently from tree to tree the boy dogged the footsteps of the
returning warriors.  At last one dropped behind his fellows as they
followed a narrow path toward the village.  A grim smile lit the lad's
face.  Swiftly he hurried forward until he moved almost above the
unconscious black--stalking him as Sheeta, the panther, stalked his
prey, as the boy had seen Sheeta do on many occasions.

Suddenly and silently he leaped forward and downward upon the broad
shoulders of his prey.  In the instant of contact his fingers sought
and found the man's throat.  The weight of the boy's body hurled the
black heavily to the ground, the knees in his back knocking the breath
from him as he struck.  Then a set of strong, white teeth fastened
themselves in his neck, and muscular fingers closed tighter upon his
wind-pipe.  For a time the warrior struggled frantically, throwing
himself about in an effort to dislodge his antagonist; but all the
while he was weakening and all the while the grim and silent thing he
could not see clung tenaciously to him, and dragged him slowly into the
bush to one side of the trail.

Hidden there at last, safe from the prying eyes of searchers, should
they miss their fellow and return for him, the lad choked the life from
the body of his victim.  At last he knew by the sudden struggle,
followed by limp relaxation, that the warrior was dead.  Then a strange
desire seized him.  His whole being quivered and thrilled.
Involuntarily he leaped to his feet and placed one foot upon the body
of his kill.  His chest expanded.  He raised his face toward the
heavens and opened his mouth to voice a strange, weird cry that seemed
screaming within him for outward expression, but no sound passed his
lips--he just stood there for a full minute, his face turned toward the
sky, his breast heaving to the pent emotion, like an animate statue of
vengeance.

The silence which marked the first great kill of the son of Tarzan was
to typify all his future kills, just as the hideous victory cry of the
bull ape had marked the kills of his mighty sire.




Chapter 7


Akut, discovering that the boy was not close behind him, turned back to
search for him.  He had gone but a short distance in return when he was
brought to a sudden and startled halt by sight of a strange figure
moving through the trees toward him.  It was the boy, yet could it be?
In his hand was a long spear, down his back hung an oblong shield such
as the black warriors who had attacked them had worn, and upon ankle
and arm were bands of iron and brass, while a loin cloth was twisted
about the youth's middle.  A knife was thrust through its folds.

When the boy saw the ape he hastened forward to exhibit his trophies.
Proudly he called attention to each of his newly won possessions.
Boastfully he recounted the details of his exploit.

"With my bare hands and my teeth I killed him," he said.  "I would have
made friends with them but they chose to be my enemies.  And now that I
have a spear I shall show Numa, too, what it means to have me for a
foe.  Only the white men and the great apes, Akut, are our friends.
Them we shall seek, all others must we avoid or kill.  This have I
learned of the jungle."

They made a detour about the hostile village, and resumed their journey
toward the coast.  The boy took much pride in his new weapons and
ornaments.  He practiced continually with the spear, throwing it at
some object ahead hour by hour as they traveled their loitering way,
until he gained a proficiency such as only youthful muscles may attain
to speedily.  All the while his training went on under the guidance of
Akut.  No longer was there a single jungle spoor but was an open book
to the keen eyes of the lad, and those other indefinite spoor that
elude the senses of civilized man and are only partially appreciable to
his savage cousin came to be familiar friends of the eager boy.  He
could differentiate the innumerable species of the herbivora by scent,
and he could tell, too, whether an animal was approaching or departing
merely by the waxing or waning strength of its effluvium.  Nor did he
need the evidence of his eyes to tell him whether there were two lions
or four up wind,--a hundred yards away or half a mile.

Much of this had Akut taught him, but far more was instinctive
knowledge--a species of strange intuition inherited from his father.
He had come to love the jungle life.  The constant battle of wits and
senses against the many deadly foes that lurked by day and by night
along the pathway of the wary and the unwary appealed to the spirit of
adventure which breathes strong in the heart of every red-blooded son
of primordial Adam.  Yet, though he loved it, he had not let his
selfish desires outweigh the sense of duty that had brought him to a
realization of the moral wrong which lay beneath the adventurous
escapade that had brought him to Africa.  His love of father and mother
was strong within him, too strong to permit unalloyed happiness which
was undoubtedly causing them days of sorrow.  And so he held tight to
his determination to find a port upon the coast where he might
communicate with them and receive funds for his return to London.
There he felt sure that he could now persuade his parents to let him
spend at least a portion of his time upon those African estates which
from little careless remarks dropped at home he knew his father
possessed.  That would be something, better at least than a lifetime of
the cramped and cloying restrictions of civilization.

And so he was rather contented than otherwise as he made his way in the
direction of the coast, for while he enjoyed the liberty and the savage
pleasures of the wild his conscience was at the same time clear, for he
knew that he was doing all that lay in his power to return to his
parents.  He rather looked forward, too, to meeting white men
again--creatures of his own kind--for there had been many occasions
upon which he had longed for other companionship than that of the old
ape.  The affair with the blacks still rankled in his heart.  He had
approached them in such innocent good fellowship and with such
childlike assurance of a hospitable welcome that the reception which
had been accorded him had proved a shock to his boyish ideals.  He no
longer looked upon the black man as his brother; but rather as only
another of the innumerable foes of the bloodthirsty jungle--a beast of
prey which walked upon two feet instead of four.

But if the blacks were his enemies there were those in the world who
were not.  There were those who always would welcome him with open
arms; who would accept him as a friend and brother, and with whom he
might find sanctuary from every enemy.  Yes, there were always white
men.  Somewhere along the coast or even in the depths of the jungle
itself there were white men.  To them he would be a welcome visitor.
They would befriend him.  And there were also the great apes--the
friends of his father and of Akut.  How glad they would be to receive
the son of Tarzan of the Apes!  He hoped that he could come upon them
before he found a trading post upon the coast.  He wanted to be able to
tell his father that he had known his old friends of the jungle, that
he had hunted with them, that he had joined with them in their savage
life, and their fierce, primeval ceremonies--the strange ceremonies of
which Akut had tried to tell him.  It cheered him immensely to dwell
upon these happy meetings.  Often he rehearsed the long speech which he
would make to the apes, in which he would tell them of the life of
their former king since he had left them.

At other times he would play at meeting with white men.  Then he would
enjoy their consternation at sight of a naked white boy trapped in the
war togs of a black warrior and roaming the jungle with only a great
ape as his companion.

And so the days passed, and with the traveling and the hunting and the
climbing the boy's muscles developed and his agility increased until
even phlegmatic Akut marvelled at the prowess of his pupil.  And the
boy, realizing his great strength and revelling in it, became careless.
He strode through the jungle, his proud head erect, defying danger.
Where Akut took to the trees at the first scent of Numa, the lad
laughed in the face of the king of beasts and walked boldly past him.
Good fortune was with him for a long time.  The lions he met were
well-fed, perhaps, or the very boldness of the strange creature which
invaded their domain so filled them with surprise that thoughts of
attack were banished from their minds as they stood, round-eyed,
watching his approach and his departure.  Whatever the cause, however,
the fact remains that on many occasions the boy passed within a few
paces of some great lion without arousing more than a warning growl.

But no two lions are necessarily alike in character or temper.  They
differ as greatly as do individuals of the human family.  Because ten
lions act similarly under similar conditions one cannot say that the
eleventh lion will do likewise--the chances are that he will not.  The
lion is a creature of high nervous development.  He thinks, therefore
he reasons.  Having a nervous system and brains he is the possessor of
temperament, which is affected variously by extraneous causes.  One day
the boy met the eleventh lion.  The former was walking across a small
plain upon which grew little clumps of bushes.  Akut was a few yards to
the left of the lad who was the first to discover the presence of Numa.

"Run, Akut," called the boy, laughing.  "Numa lies hid in the bushes to
my right.  Take to the trees.  Akut!  I, the son of Tarzan, will
protect you," and the boy, laughing, kept straight along his way which
led close beside the brush in which Numa lay concealed.

The ape shouted to him to come away, but the lad only flourished his
spear and executed an improvised war dance to show his contempt for the
king of beasts.  Closer and closer to the dread destroyer he came,
until, with a sudden, angry growl, the lion rose from his bed not ten
paces from the youth.  A huge fellow he was, this lord of the jungle
and the desert.  A shaggy mane clothed his shoulders.  Cruel fangs
armed his great jaws.  His yellow-green eyes blazed with hatred and
challenge.

The boy, with his pitifully inadequate spear ready in his hand,
realized quickly that this lion was different from the others he had
met; but he had gone too far now to retreat.  The nearest tree lay
several yards to his left--the lion could be upon him before he had
covered half the distance, and that the beast intended to charge none
could doubt who looked upon him now.  Beyond the lion was a thorn
tree--only a few feet beyond him.  It was the nearest sanctuary but
Numa stood between it and his prey.

The feel of the long spear shaft in his hand and the sight of the tree
beyond the lion gave the lad an idea--a preposterous idea--a
ridiculous, forlorn hope of an idea; but there was no time now to weigh
chances--there was but a single chance, and that was the thorn tree.
If the lion charged it would be too late--the lad must charge first,
and to the astonishment of Akut and none the less of Numa, the boy
leaped swiftly toward the beast.  Just for a second was the lion
motionless with surprise and in that second Jack Clayton put to the
crucial test an accomplishment which he had practiced at school.

Straight for the savage brute he ran, his spear held butt foremost
across his body.  Akut shrieked in terror and amazement.  The lion
stood with wide, round eyes awaiting the attack, ready to rear upon his
hind feet and receive this rash creature with blows that could crush
the skull of a buffalo.

Just in front of the lion the boy placed the butt of his spear upon the
ground, gave a mighty spring, and, before the bewildered beast could
guess the trick that had been played upon him, sailed over the lion's
head into the rending embrace of the thorn tree--safe but lacerated.

Akut had never before seen a pole-vault.  Now he leaped up and down
within the safety of his own tree, screaming taunts and boasts at the
discomfited Numa, while the boy, torn and bleeding, sought some
position in his thorny retreat in which he might find the least agony.
He had saved his life; but at considerable cost in suffering.  It
seemed to him that the lion would never leave, and it was a full hour
before the angry brute gave up his vigil and strode majestically away
across the plain.  When he was at a safe distance the boy extricated
himself from the thorn tree; but not without inflicting new wounds upon
his already tortured flesh.

It was many days before the outward evidence of the lesson he had
learned had left him; while the impression upon his mind was one that
was to remain with him for life.  Never again did he uselessly tempt
fate.

He took long chances often in his after life; but only when the taking
of chances might further the attainment of some cherished end--and,
always thereafter, he practiced pole-vaulting.

For several days the boy and the ape lay up while the former recovered
from the painful wounds inflicted by the sharp thorns.  The great
anthropoid licked the wounds of his human friend, nor, aside from this,
did they receive other treatment, but they soon healed, for healthy
flesh quickly replaces itself.

When the lad felt fit again the two continued their journey toward the
coast, and once more the boy's mind was filled with pleasurable
anticipation.

And at last the much dreamed of moment came.  They were passing through
a tangled forest when the boy's sharp eyes discovered from the lower
branches through which he was traveling an old but well-marked spoor--a
spoor that set his heart to leaping--the spoor of man, of white men,
for among the prints of naked feet were the well defined outlines of
European made boots.  The trail, which marked the passage of a
good-sized company, pointed north at right angles to the course the boy
and the ape were taking toward the coast.

Doubtless these white men knew the nearest coast settlement.  They
might even be headed for it now.  At any rate it would be worth while
overtaking them if even only for the pleasure of meeting again
creatures of his own kind.  The lad was all excitement; palpitant with
eagerness to be off in pursuit.  Akut demurred.  He wanted nothing of
men.  To him the lad was a fellow ape, for he was the son of the king
of apes.  He tried to dissuade the boy, telling him that soon they
should come upon a tribe of their own folk where some day when he was
older the boy should be king as his father had before him.  But Jack
was obdurate.  He insisted that he wanted to see white men again.  He
wanted to send a message to his parents.  Akut listened and as he
listened the intuition of the beast suggested the truth to him--the boy
was planning to return to his own kind.

The thought filled the old ape with sorrow.  He loved the boy as he had
loved the father, with the loyalty and faithfulness of a hound for its
master.  In his ape brain and his ape heart he had nursed the hope that
he and the lad would never be separated.  He saw all his fondly
cherished plans fading away, and yet he remained loyal to the lad and
to his wishes.  Though disconsolate he gave in to the boy's
determination to pursue the safari of the white men, accompanying him
upon what he believed would be their last journey together.

The spoor was but a couple of days old when the two discovered it,
which meant that the slow-moving caravan was but a few hours distant
from them whose trained and agile muscles could carry their bodies
swiftly through the branches above the tangled undergrowth which had
impeded the progress of the laden carriers of the white men.

The boy was in the lead, excitement and anticipation carrying him ahead
of his companion to whom the attainment of their goal meant only
sorrow.  And it was the boy who first saw the rear guard of the caravan
and the white men he had been so anxious to overtake.

Stumbling along the tangled trail of those ahead a dozen heavily laden
blacks who, from fatigue or sickness, had dropped behind were being
prodded by the black soldiers of the rear guard, kicked when they fell,
and then roughly jerked to their feet and hustled onward.  On either
side walked a giant white man, heavy blonde beards almost obliterating
their countenances.  The boy's lips formed a glad cry of salutation as
his eyes first discovered the whites--a cry that was never uttered, for
almost immediately he witnessed that which turned his happiness to
anger as he saw that both the white men were wielding heavy whips
brutally upon the naked backs of the poor devils staggering along
beneath loads that would have overtaxed the strength and endurance of
strong men at the beginning of a new day.

Every now and then the rear guard and the white men cast apprehensive
glances rearward as though momentarily expecting the materialization of
some long expected danger from that quarter.  The boy had paused after
his first sight of the caravan, and now was following slowly in the
wake of the sordid, brutal spectacle.  Presently Akut came up with him.
To the beast there was less of horror in the sight than to the lad, yet
even the great ape growled beneath his breath at useless torture being
inflicted upon the helpless slaves.  He looked at the boy.  Now that he
had caught up with the creatures of his own kind, why was it that he
did not rush forward and greet them?  He put the question to his
companion.

"They are fiends," muttered the boy.  "I would not travel with such as
they, for if I did I should set upon them and kill them the first time
they beat their people as they are beating them now; but," he added,
after a moment's thought, "I can ask them the whereabouts of the
nearest port, and then, Akut, we can leave them."

The ape made no reply, and the boy swung to the ground and started at a
brisk walk toward the safari.  He was a hundred yards away, perhaps,
when one of the whites caught sight of him.  The man gave a shout of
alarm, instantly levelling his rifle upon the boy and firing.  The
bullet struck just in front of its mark, scattering turf and fallen
leaves against the lad's legs.  A second later the other white and the
black soldiers of the rear guard were firing hysterically at the boy.

Jack leaped behind a tree, unhit.  Days of panic ridden flight through
the jungle had filled Carl Jenssen and Sven Malbihn with jangling
nerves and their native boys with unreasoning terror.  Every new note
from behind sounded to their frightened ears the coming of The Sheik
and his bloodthirsty entourage.  They were in a blue funk, and the
sight of the naked white warrior stepping silently out of the jungle
through which they had just passed had been sufficient shock to let
loose in action all the pent nerve energy of Malbihn, who had been the
first to see the strange apparition.  And Malbihn's shout and shot had
set the others going.

When their nervous energy had spent itself and they came to take stock
of what they had been fighting it developed that Malbihn alone had seen
anything clearly.  Several of the blacks averred that they too had
obtained a good view of the creature but their descriptions of it
varied so greatly that Jenssen, who had seen nothing himself, was
inclined to be a trifle skeptical.  One of the blacks insisted that the
thing had been eleven feet tall, with a man's body and the head of an
elephant.  Another had seen THREE immense Arabs with huge, black
beards; but when, after conquering their nervousness, the rear guard
advanced upon the enemy's position to investigate they found nothing,
for Akut and the boy had retreated out of range of the unfriendly guns.

Jack was disheartened and sad.  He had not entirely recovered from the
depressing effect of the unfriendly reception he had received at the
hands of the blacks, and now he had found an even more hostile one
accorded him by men of his own color.

"The lesser beasts flee from me in terror," he murmured, half to
himself, "the greater beasts are ready to tear me to pieces at sight.
Black men would kill me with their spears or arrows.  And now white
men, men of my own kind, have fired upon me and driven me away.  Are
all the creatures of the world my enemies?  Has the son of Tarzan no
friend other than Akut?"

The old ape drew closer to the boy.

"There are the great apes," he said.  "They only will be the friends of
Akut's friend.  Only the great apes will welcome the son of Tarzan.
You have seen that men want nothing of you.  Let us go now and continue
our search for the great apes--our people."

The language of the great apes is a combination of monosyllabic
gutturals, amplified by gestures and signs.  It may not be literally
translated into human speech; but as near as may be this is what Akut
said to the boy.

The two proceeded in silence for some time after Akut had spoken.  The
boy was immersed in deep thought--bitter thoughts in which hatred and
revenge predominated.  Finally he spoke:  "Very well, Akut," he said,
"we will find our friends, the great apes."

The anthropoid was overjoyed; but he gave no outward demonstration of
his pleasure.  A low grunt was his only response, and a moment later he
had leaped nimbly upon a small and unwary rodent that had been
surprised at a fatal distance from its burrow.  Tearing the unhappy
creature in two Akut handed the lion's share to the lad.




Chapter 8


A year had passed since the two Swedes had been driven in terror from
the savage country where The Sheik held sway.  Little Meriem still
played with Geeka, lavishing all her childish love upon the now almost
hopeless ruin of what had never, even in its palmiest days, possessed
even a slight degree of loveliness.  But to Meriem, Geeka was all that
was sweet and adorable.  She carried to the deaf ears of the battered
ivory head all her sorrows all her hopes and all her ambitions, for
even in the face of hopelessness, in the clutches of the dread
authority from which there was no escape, little Meriem yet cherished
hopes and ambitions.  It is true that her ambitions were rather
nebulous in form, consisting chiefly of a desire to escape with Geeka
to some remote and unknown spot where there were no Sheiks, no
Mabunus--where El Adrea could find no entrance, and where she might
play all day surrounded only by flowers and birds and the harmless
little monkeys playing in the tree tops.

The Sheik had been away for a long time, conducting a caravan of ivory,
skins, and rubber far into the north.  The interim had been one of
great peace for Meriem.  It is true that Mabunu had still been with
her, to pinch or beat her as the mood seized the villainous old hag;
but Mabunu was only one.  When The Sheik was there also there were two
of them, and The Sheik was stronger and more brutal even than Mabunu.
Little Meriem often wondered why the grim old man hated her so.  It is
true that he was cruel and unjust to all with whom he came in contact,
but to Meriem he reserved his greatest cruelties, his most studied
injustices.

Today Meriem was squatting at the foot of a large tree which grew
inside the palisade close to the edge of the village.  She was
fashioning a tent of leaves for Geeka.  Before the tent were some
pieces of wood and small leaves and a few stones.  These were the
household utensils.  Geeka was cooking dinner.  As the little girl
played she prattled continuously to her companion, propped in a sitting
position with a couple of twigs.  She was totally absorbed in the
domestic duties of Geeka--so much so that she did not note the gentle
swaying of the branches of the tree above her as they bent to the body
of the creature that had entered them stealthily from the jungle.

In happy ignorance the little girl played on, while from above two
steady eyes looked down upon her--unblinking, unwavering.  There was
none other than the little girl in this part of the village, which had
been almost deserted since The Sheik had left long months before upon
his journey toward the north.

And out in the jungle, an hour's march from the village, The Sheik was
leading his returning caravan homeward.


A year had passed since the white men had fired upon the lad and driven
him back into the jungle to take up his search for the only remaining
creatures to whom he might look for companionship--the great apes.  For
months the two had wandered eastward, deeper and deeper into the
jungle.  The year had done much for the boy--turning his already mighty
muscles to thews of steel, developing his woodcraft to a point where it
verged upon the uncanny, perfecting his arboreal instincts, and
training him in the use of both natural and artificial weapons.

He had become at last a creature of marvelous physical powers and
mental cunning.  He was still but a boy, yet so great was his strength
that the powerful anthropoid with which he often engaged in mimic
battle was no match for him.  Akut had taught him to fight as the bull
ape fights, nor ever was there a teacher better fitted to instruct in
the savage warfare of primordial man, or a pupil better equipped to
profit by the lessons of a master.

As the two searched for a band of the almost extinct species of ape to
which Akut belonged they lived upon the best the jungle afforded.
Antelope and zebra fell to the boy's spear, or were dragged down by the
two powerful beasts of prey who leaped upon them from some overhanging
limb or from the ambush of the undergrowth beside the trail to the
water hole or the ford.

The pelt of a leopard covered the nakedness of the youth; but the
wearing of it had not been dictated by any prompting of modesty.  With
the rifle shots of the white men showering about him he had reverted to
the savagery of the beast that is inherent in each of us, but that
flamed more strongly in this boy whose father had been raised a beast
of prey.  He wore his leopard skin at first in response to a desire to
parade a trophy of his prowess, for he had slain the leopard with his
knife in a hand-to-hand combat.  He saw that the skin was beautiful,
which appealed to his barbaric sense of ornamentation, and when it
stiffened and later commenced to decompose because of his having no
knowledge of how to cure or tan it was  with sorrow and regret that he
discarded it.  Later, when he chanced upon a lone, black warrior
wearing the counterpart of it, soft and clinging and beautiful from
proper curing, it required but an instant to leap from above upon the
shoulders of the unsuspecting black, sink a keen blade into his heart
and possess the rightly preserved hide.

There were no after-qualms of conscience.  In the jungle might is
right, nor does it take long to inculcate this axiom in the mind of a
jungle dweller, regardless of what his past training may have been.
That the black would have killed him had he had the chance the boy knew
full well.  Neither he nor the black were any more sacred than the
lion, or the buffalo, the zebra or the deer, or any other of the
countless creatures who roamed, or slunk, or flew, or wriggled through
the dark mazes of the forest.  Each had but a single life, which was
sought by many.  The greater number of enemies slain the better chance
to prolong that life.  So the boy smiled and donned the finery of the
vanquished, and went his way with Akut, searching, always searching for
the elusive anthropoids who were to welcome them with open arms.  And
at last they found them.  Deep in the jungle, buried far from sight of
man, they came upon such another little natural arena as had witnessed
the wild ceremony of the Dum-Dum in which the boy's father had taken
part long years before.

First, at a great distance, they heard the beating of the drum of the
great apes.  They were sleeping in the safety of a huge tree when the
booming sound smote upon their ears.  Both awoke at once.  Akut was the
first to interpret the strange cadence.

"The great apes!" he growled.  "They dance the Dum-Dum.  Come, Korak,
son of Tarzan, let us go to our people."

Months before Akut had given the boy a name of his own choosing, since
he could not master the man given name of Jack.  Korak is as near as it
may be interpreted into human speech.  In the language of the apes it
means Killer.  Now the Killer rose upon the branch of the great tree
where he had been sleeping with his back braced against the stem.  He
stretched his lithe young muscles, the moonlight filtering through the
foliage from above dappling his brown skin with little patches of light.

The ape, too, stood up, half squatting after the manner of his kind.
Low growls rumbled from the bottom of his deep chest--growls of excited
anticipation.  The boy growled in harmony with the ape.  Then the
anthropoid slid softly to the ground.  Close by, in the direction of
the booming drum, lay a clearing which they must cross.  The moon
flooded it with silvery light.  Half-erect, the great ape shuffled into
the full glare of the moon.  At his side, swinging gracefully along in
marked contrast to the awkwardness of his companion, strode the boy,
the dark, shaggy coat of the one brushing against the smooth, clear
hide of the other.  The lad was humming now, a music hall air that had
found its way to the forms of the great English public school that was
to see him no more.  He was happy and expectant.  The moment he had
looked forward to for so long was about to be realized.  He was coming
into his own.  He was coming home.  As the months had dragged or flown
along, retarded or spurred on as privation or adventure predominated,
thoughts of his own home, while oft recurring, had become less vivid.
The old life had grown to seem more like a dream than a reality, and
the balking of his determination to reach the coast and return to
London had finally thrown the hope of realization so remotely into the
future that it too now seemed little more than a pleasant but hopeless
dream.

Now all thoughts of London and civilization were crowded so far into
the background of his brain that they might as well have been
non-existent.  Except for form and mental development he was as much an
ape as the great, fierce creature at his side.

In the exuberance of his joy he slapped his companion roughly on the
side of the head.  Half in anger, half in play the anthropoid turned
upon him, his fangs bared and glistening.  Long, hairy arms reached out
to seize him, and, as they had done a thousand times before, the two
clinched in mimic battle, rolling upon the sward, striking, growling
and biting, though never closing their teeth in more than a rough
pinch.  It was wondrous practice for them both.  The boy brought into
play wrestling tricks that he had learned at school, and many of these
Akut learned to use and to foil.  And from the ape the boy learned the
methods that had been handed down to Akut from some common ancestor of
them both, who had roamed the teeming earth when ferns were trees and
crocodiles were birds.

But there was one art the boy possessed which Akut could not master,
though he did achieve fair proficiency in it for an ape--boxing.  To
have his bull-like charges stopped and crumpled with a suddenly planted
fist upon the end of his snout, or a painful jolt in the short ribs,
always surprised Akut.  It angered him too, and at such times his
mighty jaws came nearer to closing in the soft flesh of his friend than
at any other, for he was still an ape, with an ape's short temper and
brutal instincts; but the difficulty was in catching his tormentor
while his rage lasted, for when he lost his head and rushed madly into
close quarters with the boy he discovered that the stinging hail of
blows released upon him always found their mark and effectually stopped
him--effectually and painfully.  Then he would withdraw growling
viciously, backing away with grinning jaws distended, to sulk for an
hour or so.

Tonight they did not box.  Just for a moment or two they wrestled
playfully, until the scent of Sheeta, the panther, brought them to
their feet, alert and wary.  The great cat was passing through the
jungle in front of them.  For a moment it paused, listening.  The boy
and the ape growled menacingly in chorus and the carnivore moved on.

Then the two took up their journey toward the sound of the Dum-Dum.
Louder and louder came the beating of the drum.  Now, at last, they
could hear the growling of the dancing apes, and strong to their
nostrils came the scent of their kind.  The lad trembled with
excitement.  The hair down Akut's spine stiffened--the symptoms of
happiness and anger are often similar.

Silently they crept through the jungle as they neared the meeting place
of the apes.  Now they were in the trees, worming their way forward,
alert for sentinels.  Presently through a break in the foliage the
scene burst upon the eager eyes of the boy.  To Akut it was a familiar
one; but to Korak it was all new.  His nerves tingled at the savage
sight.  The great bulls were dancing in the moonlight, leaping in an
irregular circle about the flat-topped earthen drum about which three
old females sat beating its resounding top with sticks worn smooth by
long years of use.

Akut, knowing the temper and customs of his kind, was too wise to make
their presence known until the frenzy of the dance had passed.  After
the drum was quiet and the bellies of the tribe well-filled he would
hail them.  Then would come a parley, after which he and Korak would be
accepted into membership by the community.  There might be those who
would object; but such could be overcome by brute force, of which he
and the lad had an ample surplus.  For weeks, possibly months, their
presence might cause ever decreasing suspicion among others of the
tribe; but eventually they would become as born brothers to these
strange apes.

He hoped that they had been among those who had known Tarzan, for that
would help in the introduction of the lad and in the consummation of
Akut's dearest wish, that Korak should become king of the apes.  It was
with difficulty, however, that Akut kept the boy from rushing into the
midst of the dancing anthropoids--an act that would have meant the
instant extermination of them both, since the hysterical frenzy into
which the great apes work themselves during the performance of their
strange rites is of such a nature that even the most ferocious of the
carnivora give them a wide berth at such times.

As the moon declined slowly toward the lofty, foliaged horizon of the
amphitheater the booming of the drum decreased and lessened were the
exertions of the dancers, until, at last, the final note was struck and
the huge beasts turned to fall upon the feast they had dragged hither
for the orgy.

From what he had seen and heard Akut was able to explain to Korak that
the rites proclaimed the choosing of a new king, and he pointed out to
the boy the massive figure of the shaggy monarch, come into his
kingship, no doubt, as many human rulers have come into theirs--by the
murder of his predecessor.

When the apes had filled their bellies and many of them had sought the
bases of the trees to curl up in sleep Akut plucked Korak by the arm.

"Come," he whispered.  "Come slowly.  Follow me.  Do as Akut does."

Then he advanced slowly through the trees until he stood upon a bough
overhanging one side of the amphitheater.  Here he stood in silence for
a moment.  Then he uttered a low growl.  Instantly a score of apes
leaped to their feet.  Their savage little eyes sped quickly around the
periphery of the clearing.  The king ape was the first to see the two
figures upon the branch.  He gave voice to an ominous growl.  Then he
took a few lumbering steps in the direction of the intruders.  His hair
was bristling.  His legs were stiff, imparting a halting, jerky motion
to his gait.  Behind him pressed a number of bulls.

He stopped just a little before he came beneath the two--just far
enough to be beyond their spring.  Wary king!  Here he stood rocking
himself to and fro upon his short legs, baring his fangs in hideous
grinnings, rumbling out an ever increasing volume of growls, which were
slowly but steadily increasing to the proportions of roars.  Akut knew
that he was planning an attack upon them.  The old ape did not wish to
fight.  He had come with the boy to cast his lot with the tribe.

"I am Akut," he said.  "This is Korak.  Korak is the son of Tarzan who
was king of the apes.  I, too, was king of the apes who dwelt in the
midst of the great waters.  We have come to hunt with you, to fight
with you.  We are great hunters.  We are mighty fighters.  Let us come
in peace."

The king ceased his rocking.  He eyed the pair from beneath his
beetling brows.  His bloodshot eyes were savage and crafty.  His
kingship was very new and he was jealous of it.  He feared the
encroachments of two strange apes.  The sleek, brown, hairless body of
the lad spelled "man," and man he feared and hated.

"Go away!" he growled.  "Go away, or I will kill you."

The eager lad, standing behind the great Akut, had been pulsing with
anticipation and happiness.  He wanted to leap down among these hairy
monsters and show them that he was their friend, that he was one of
them.  He had expected that they would receive him with open arms, and
now the words of the king ape filled him with indignation and sorrow.
The blacks had set upon him and driven him away.  Then he had turned to
the white men--to those of his own kind--only to hear the ping of
bullets where he had expected words of cordial welcome.  The great apes
had remained his final hope.  To them he looked for the companionship
man had denied him.  Suddenly rage overwhelmed him.

The king ape was almost directly beneath him.  The others were formed
in a half circle several yards behind the king.  They were watching
events interestedly.  Before Akut could guess his intention, or
prevent, the boy leaped to the ground directly in the path of the king,
who had now succeeded in stimulating himself to a frenzy of fury.

"I am Korak!" shouted the boy.  "I am the Killer.  I came to live among
you as a friend.  You want to drive me away.  Very well, then, I shall
go; but before I go I shall show you that the son of Tarzan is your
master, as his father was before him--that he is not afraid of your
king or you."

For an instant the king ape had stood motionless with surprise.  He had
expected no such rash action upon the part of either of the intruders.
Akut was equally surprised.  Now he shouted excitedly for Korak to come
back, for he knew that in the sacred arena the other bulls might be
expected to come to the assistance of their king against an outsider,
though there was small likelihood that the king would need assistance.
Once those mighty jaws closed upon the boy's soft neck the end would
come quickly.  To leap to his rescue would mean death for Akut, too;
but the brave old ape never hesitated.  Bristling and growling, he
dropped to the sward just as the king ape charged.

The beast's hands clutched for their hold as the animal sprang upon the
lad.  The fierce jaws were wide distended to bury the yellow fangs
deeply in the brown hide.  Korak, too, leaped forward to meet the
attack; but leaped crouching, beneath the outstretched arms.  At the
instant of contact the lad pivoted on one foot, and with all the weight
of his body and the strength of his trained muscles drove a clenched
fist into the bull's stomach.  With a gasping shriek the king ape
collapsed, clutching futilely for the agile, naked creature nimbly
sidestepping from his grasp.

Howls of rage and dismay broke from the bull apes behind the fallen
king, as with murder in their savage little hearts they rushed forward
upon Korak and Akut; but the old ape was too wise to court any such
unequal encounter.  To have counseled the boy to retreat now would have
been futile, and Akut knew it.  To delay even a second in argument
would have sealed the death warrants of them both.  There was but a
single hope and Akut seized it.  Grasping the lad around the waist he
lifted him bodily from the ground, and turning ran swiftly toward
another tree which swung low branches above the arena.  Close upon
their heels swarmed the hideous mob; but Akut, old though he was and
burdened by the weight of the struggling Korak, was still fleeter than
his pursuers.

With a bound he grasped a low limb, and with the agility of a little
monkey swung himself and the boy to temporary safety.  Nor did he
hesitate even here; but raced on through the jungle night, bearing his
burden to safety.  For a time the bulls pursued; but presently, as the
swifter outdistanced the slower and found themselves separated from
their fellows they abandoned the chase, standing roaring and screaming
until the jungle reverberated to their hideous noises.  Then they
turned and retraced their way to the amphitheater.

When Akut felt assured that they were no longer pursued he stopped and
released Korak.  The boy was furious.

"Why did you drag me away?" he cried.  "I would have taught them!  I
would have taught them all!  Now they will think that I am afraid of
them."

"What they think cannot harm you," said Akut.  "You are alive.  If I
had not brought you away you would be dead now and so would I.  Do you
not know that even Numa slinks from the path of the great apes when
there are many of them and they are mad?"




Chapter 9


It was an unhappy Korak who wandered aimlessly through the jungle the
day following his inhospitable reception by the great apes.  His heart
was heavy from disappointment.  Unsatisfied vengeance smoldered in his
breast.  He looked with hatred upon the denizens of his jungle world,
baring his fighting fangs and growling at those that came within
radius of his senses.  The mark of his father's early life was strong
upon him and enhanced by months of association with beasts, from whom
the imitative faculty of youth had absorbed a countless number of
little mannerisms of the predatory creatures of the wild.

He bared his fangs now as naturally and upon as slight provocation as
Sheeta, the panther, bared his.  He growled as ferociously as Akut
himself.  When he came suddenly upon another beast his quick crouch
bore a strange resemblance to the arching of a cat's back.  Korak, the
killer, was looking for trouble.  In his heart of hearts he hoped to
meet the king ape who had driven him from the amphitheater.  To this
end he insisted upon remaining in the vicinity; but the exigencies of
the perpetual search for food led them several miles further away
during day.

They were moving slowly down wind, and warily because the advantage was
with whatever beast might chance to be hunting ahead of them, where
their scent-spoor was being borne by the light breeze.  Suddenly the
two halted simultaneously.  Two heads were cocked upon one side.  Like
creatures hewn from solid rock they stood immovable, listening.  Not a
muscle quivered.  For several seconds they remained thus, then Korak
advanced cautiously a few yards and leaped nimbly into a tree.  Akut
followed close upon his heels.  Neither had made a noise that would
have been appreciable to human ears at a dozen paces.

Stopping often to listen they crept forward through the trees.  That
both were greatly puzzled was apparent from the questioning looks they
cast at one another from time to time.  Finally the lad caught a
glimpse of a palisade a hundred yards ahead, and beyond it the tops of
some goatskin tents and a number of thatched huts.  His lip upcurled in
a savage snarl.  Blacks!  How he hated them.  He signed to Akut to
remain where he was while he advanced to reconnoiter.

Woe betide the unfortunate villager whom The Killer came upon now.
Slinking through the lower branches of the trees, leaping lightly from
one jungle giant to its neighbor where the distance was not too great,
or swinging from one hand hold to another Korak came silently toward
the village.  He heard a voice beyond the palisade and toward that he
made his way.  A great tree overhung the enclosure at the very point
from which the voice came.  Into this Korak crept.  His spear was ready
in his hand.  His ears told him of the proximity of a human being.  All
that his eyes required was a single glance to show him his target.
Then, lightning like, the missile would fly to its goal.  With raised
spear he crept among the branches of the tree glaring narrowly downward
in search of the owner of the voice which rose to him from below.

At last he saw a human back.  The spear hand flew to the limit of the
throwing position to gather the force that would send the iron shod
missile completely through the body of the unconscious victim.  And
then The Killer paused.  He leaned forward a little to get a better
view of the target.  Was it to insure more perfect aim, or had there
been that in the graceful lines and the childish curves of the little
body below him that had held in check the spirit of murder running riot
in his veins?

He lowered his spear cautiously that it might make no noise by scraping
against foliage or branches.  Quietly he crouched in a comfortable
position along a great limb and there he lay with wide eyes looking
down in wonder upon the creature he had crept upon to kill--looking
down upon a little girl, a little nut brown maiden.  The snarl had gone
from his lip.  His only expression was one of interested attention--he
was trying to discover what the girl was doing.  Suddenly a broad grin
overspread his face, for a turn of the girl's body had revealed Geeka
of the ivory head and the rat skin torso--Geeka of the splinter limbs
and the disreputable appearance.  The little girl raised the marred
face to hers and rocking herself backward and forward crooned a
plaintive Arab lullaby to the doll.  A softer light entered the eyes of
The Killer.  For a long hour that passed very quickly to him Korak lay
with gaze riveted upon the playing child.  Not once had he had a view
of the girl's full face.  For the most part he saw only a mass of wavy,
black hair, one brown little shoulder exposed upon the side from where
her single robe was caught beneath her arm, and a shapely knee
protruding from beneath her garment as she sat cross legged upon the
ground.  A tilt of the head as she emphasized some maternal admonition
to the passive Geeka revealed occasionally a rounded cheek or a piquant
little chin.  Now she was shaking a slim finger at Geeka, reprovingly,
and again she crushed to her heart this only object upon which she
might lavish the untold wealth of her childish affections.

Korak, momentarily forgetful of his bloody mission, permitted the
fingers of his spear hand to relax a little their grasp upon the shaft
of his formidable weapon.  It slipped, almost falling; but the
occurrence recalled The Killer to himself.  It reminded him of his
purpose in slinking stealthily upon the owner of the voice that had
attracted his vengeful attention.  He glanced at the spear, with its
well-worn grip and cruel, barbed head.  Then he let his eyes wander
again to the dainty form below him.  In imagination he saw the heavy
weapon shooting downward.  He saw it pierce the tender flesh, driving
its way deep into the yielding body.  He saw the ridiculous doll drop
from its owner's arms to lie sprawled and pathetic beside the quivering
body of the little girl.  The Killer shuddered, scowling at the
inanimate iron and wood of the spear as though they constituted a
sentient being endowed with a malignant mind.

Korak wondered what the girl would do were he to drop suddenly from the
tree to her side.  Most likely she would scream and run away.  Then
would come the men of the village with spears and guns and set upon
him.  They would either kill him or drive him away.  A lump rose in the
boy's throat.  He craved the companionship of his own kind, though he
scarce realized how greatly.  He would have liked to slip down beside
the little girl and talk with her, though he knew from the words he had
overheard that she spoke a language with which he was unfamiliar.  They
could have talked by signs a little.  That would have been better than
nothing.  Too, he would have been glad to see her face.  What he had
glimpsed assured him that she was pretty; but her strongest appeal to
him lay in the affectionate nature revealed by her gentle mothering of
the grotesque doll.

At last he hit upon a plan.  He would attract her attention, and
reassure her by a smiling greeting from a greater distance.  Silently
he wormed his way back into the tree.  It was his intention to hail her
from beyond the palisade, giving her the feeling of security which he
imagined the stout barricade would afford.

He had scarcely left his position in the tree when his attention was
attracted by a considerable noise upon the opposite side of the
village.  By moving a little he could see the gate at the far end of
the main street.  A number of men, women and children were running
toward it.  It swung open, revealing the head of a caravan upon the
opposite side.  In trooped the motley organization--black slaves and
dark hued Arabs of the northern deserts; cursing camel drivers urging
on their vicious charges; overburdened donkeys, waving sadly pendulous
ears while they endured with stoic patience the brutalities of their
masters; goats, sheep and horses.  Into the village they all trooped
behind a tall, sour, old man, who rode without greetings to those who
shrunk from his path directly to a large goatskin tent in the center of
the village.  Here he spoke to a wrinkled hag.

Korak, from his vantage spot, could see it all.  He saw the old man
asking questions of the black woman, and then he saw the latter point
toward a secluded corner of the village which was hidden from the main
street by the tents of the Arabs and the huts of the natives in the
direction of the tree beneath which the little girl played.  This was
doubtless her father, thought Korak.  He had been away and his first
thought upon returning was of his little daughter.  How glad she would
be to see him!  How she would run and throw herself into his arms, to
be crushed to his breast and covered with his kisses.  Korak sighed.
He thought of his own father and mother far away in London.

He returned to his place in the tree above the girl.  If he couldn't
have happiness of this sort himself he wanted to enjoy the happiness of
others.  Possibly if he made himself known to the old man he might be
permitted to come to the village occasionally as a friend.  It would be
worth trying.  He would wait until the old Arab had greeted his
daughter, then he would make his presence known with signs of peace.

The Arab was striding softly toward the girl.  In a moment he would be
beside her, and then how surprised and delighted she would be!  Korak's
eyes sparkled in anticipation--and now the old man stood behind the
little girl.  His stern old face was still unrelaxed.  The child was
yet unconscious of his presence.  She prattled on to the unresponsive
Geeka.  Then the old man coughed.  With a start the child glanced
quickly up over her shoulder.  Korak could see her full face now.  It
was very beautiful in its sweet and innocent childishness--all soft and
lovely curves.  He could see her great, dark eyes.  He looked for the
happy love light that would follow recognition; but it did not come.
Instead, terror, stark, paralyzing terror, was mirrored in her eyes, in
the expression of her mouth, in the tense, cowering attitude of her
body.  A grim smile curved the thin, cruel lip of the Arab.  The child
essayed to crawl away; but before she could get out of his reach the
old man kicked her brutally, sending her sprawling upon the grass.
Then he followed her up to seize and strike her as was his custom.

Above them, in the tree, a beast crouched where a moment before had
been a boy--a beast with dilating nostrils and bared fangs--a beast
that trembled with rage.

The Sheik was stooping to reach for the girl when The Killer dropped to
the ground at his side.  His spear was still in his left hand but he
had forgotten it.  Instead his right fist was clenched and as The Sheik
took a backward step, astonished by the sudden materialization of this
strange apparition apparently out of clear air, the heavy fist landed
full upon his mouth backed by the weight of the young giant and the
terrific power of his more than human muscles.

Bleeding and senseless The Sheik sank to earth.  Korak turned toward
the child.  She had regained her feet and stood wide eyed and
frightened, looking first into his face and then, horror struck, at the
recumbent figure of The Sheik.  In an involuntary gesture of protection
The Killer threw an arm about the girl's shoulders and stood waiting
for the Arab to regain consciousness.  For a moment they remained thus,
when the girl spoke.

"When he regains his senses he will kill me," she said, in Arabic.

Korak could not understand her.  He shook his head, speaking to her
first in English and then in the language of the great apes; but
neither of these was intelligible to her.  She leaned forward and
touched the hilt of the long knife that the Arab wore.  Then she raised
her clasped hand above her head and drove an imaginary blade into her
breast above her heart.  Korak understood.  The old man would kill her.
The girl came to his side again and stood there trembling.  She did not
fear him.  Why should she?  He had saved her from a terrible beating at
the hands of The Sheik.  Never, in her memory, had another so
befriended her.  She looked up into his face.  It was a boyish,
handsome face, nut-brown like her own.  She admired the spotted leopard
skin that circled his lithe body from one shoulder to his knees.  The
metal anklets and armlets adorning him aroused her envy.  Always had
she coveted something of the kind; but never had The Sheik permitted
her more than the single cotton garment that barely sufficed to cover
her nakedness.  No furs or silks or jewelry had there ever been for
little Meriem.

And Korak looked at the girl.  He had always held girls in a species of
contempt.  Boys who associated with them were, in his estimation,
mollycoddles.  He wondered what he should do.  Could he leave her here
to be abused, possibly murdered, by the villainous old Arab?  No!  But,
on the other hand, could he take her into the jungle with him?  What
could he accomplish burdened by a weak and frightened girl?  She would
scream at her own shadow when the moon came out upon the jungle night
and the great beasts roamed, moaning and roaring, through the darkness.

He stood for several minutes buried in thought.  The girl watched his
face, wondering what was passing in his mind.  She, too, was thinking
of the future.  She feared to remain and suffer the vengeance of The
Sheik.  There was no one in all the world to whom she might turn, other
than this half-naked stranger who had dropped miraculously from the
clouds to save her from one of The Sheik's accustomed beatings.  Would
her new friend leave her now?  Wistfully she gazed at his intent face.
She moved a little closer to him, laying a slim, brown hand upon his
arm.  The contact awakened the lad from his absorption.  He looked down
at her, and then his arm went about her shoulder once more, for he saw
tears upon her lashes.

"Come," he said.  "The jungle is kinder than man.  You shall live in
the jungle and Korak and Akut will protect you."

She did not understand his words, but the pressure of his arm drawing
her away from the prostrate Arab and the tents was quite intelligible.
One little arm crept about his waist and together they walked toward
the palisade.  Beneath the great tree that had harbored Korak while he
watched the girl at play he lifted her in his arms and throwing her
lightly across his shoulder leaped nimbly into the lower branches.  Her
arms were about his neck and from one little hand Geeka dangled down
his straight young back.

And so Meriem entered the jungle with Korak, trusting, in her childish
innocence, the stranger who had befriended her, and perhaps influenced
in her belief in him by that strange intuitive power possessed by
woman.  She had no conception of what the future might hold.  She did
not know, nor could she have guessed the manner of life led by her
protector.  Possibly she pictured a distant village similar to that of
The Sheik in which lived other white men like the stranger.  That she
was to be taken into the savage, primeval life of a jungle beast could
not have occurred to her.  Had it, her little heart would have
palpitated with fear.  Often had she wished to run away from the
cruelties of The Sheik and Mabunu; but the dangers of the jungle always
had deterred her.

The two had gone but a short distance from the village when the girl
spied the huge proportions of the great Akut.  With a half-stifled
scream she clung more closely to Korak, and pointed fearfully toward
the ape.

Akut, thinking that The Killer was returning with a prisoner, came
growling toward them--a little girl aroused no more sympathy in the
beast's heart than would a full-grown bull ape.  She was a stranger and
therefore to be killed.  He bared his yellow fangs as he approached,
and to his surprise The Killer bared his likewise, but he bared them at
Akut, and snarled menacingly.

"Ah," thought Akut, "The Killer has taken a mate," and so, obedient to
the tribal laws of his kind, he left them alone, becoming suddenly
absorbed in a fuzzy caterpillar of peculiarly succulent appearance.
The larva disposed of, he glanced from the corner of an eye at Korak.
The youth had deposited his burden upon a large limb, where she clung
desperately to keep from falling.

"She will accompany us," said Korak to Akut, jerking a thumb in the
direction of the girl.  "Do not harm her.  We will protect her."

Akut shrugged.  To be burdened by the young of man was in no way to his
liking.  He could see from her evident fright at her position on the
branch, and from the terrified glances she cast in his direction that
she was hopelessly unfit.  By all the ethics of Akut's training and
inheritance the unfit should be eliminated; but if The Killer wished
this there was nothing to be done about it but to tolerate her.  Akut
certainly didn't want her--of that he was quite positive.  Her skin was
too smooth and hairless.  Quite snake-like, in fact, and her face was
most unattractive.  Not at all like that of a certain lovely she he had
particularly noticed among the apes in the amphitheater the previous
night.  Ah, there was true feminine beauty for one!--a great, generous
mouth; lovely, yellow fangs, and the cutest, softest side whiskers!
Akut sighed.  Then he rose, expanded his great chest and strutted back
and forth along a substantial branch, for even a puny thing like this
she of Korak's might admire his fine coat and his graceful carriage.

But poor little Meriem only shrank closer to Korak and almost wished
that she were back in the village of The Sheik where the terrors of
existence were of human origin, and so more or less familiar.  The
hideous ape frightened her.  He was so large and so ferocious in
appearance.  His actions she could only interpret as a menace, for how
could she guess that he was parading to excite admiration?  Nor could
she know of the bond of fellowship which existed between this great
brute and the godlike youth who had rescued her from the Sheik.

Meriem spent an evening and a night of unmitigated terror.  Korak and
Akut led her along dizzy ways as they searched for food.  Once they hid
her in the branches of a tree while they stalked a near-by buck.  Even
her natural terror of being left alone in the awful jungle was
submerged in a greater horror as she saw the man and the beast spring
simultaneously upon their prey and drag it down, as she saw the
handsome face of her preserver contorted in a bestial snarl; as she saw
his strong, white teeth buried in the soft flesh of the kill.

When he came back to her blood smeared his face and hands and breast
and she shrank from him as he offered her a huge hunk of hot, raw meat.
He was evidently much disturbed by her refusal to eat, and when, a
moment later, he scampered away into the forest to return with fruit
for her she was once more forced to alter her estimation of him.  This
time she did not shrink, but acknowledged his gift with a smile that,
had she known it, was more than ample payment to the affection starved
boy.

The sleeping problem vexed Korak.  He knew that the girl could not
balance herself in safety in a tree crotch while she slept, nor would
it be safe to permit her to sleep upon the ground open to the attacks
of prowling beasts of prey.  There was but a single solution that
presented itself--he must hold her in his arms all night.  And that he
did, with Akut braced upon one side of her and he upon the other, so
that she was warmed by the bodies of them both.

She did not sleep much until the night was half spent; but at last
Nature overcame her terrors of the black abyss beneath and the hairy
body of the wild beast at her side, and she fell into a deep slumber
which outlasted the darkness.  When she opened her eyes the sun was
well up.  At first she could not believe in the reality of her
position.  Her head had rolled from Korak's shoulder so that her eyes
were directed upon the hairy back of the ape.  At sight of it she
shrank away.  Then she realized that someone was holding her, and
turning her head she saw the smiling eyes of the youth regarding her.
When he smiled she could not fear him, and now she shrank closer
against him in natural revulsion toward the rough coat of the brute
upon her other side.

Korak spoke to her in the language of the apes; but she shook her head,
and spoke to him in the language of the Arab, which was as
unintelligible to him as was ape speech to her.  Akut sat up and looked
at them.  He could understand what Korak said but the girl made only
foolish noises that were entirely unintelligible and ridiculous.  Akut
could not understand what Korak saw in her to attract him.  He looked
at her long and steadily, appraising her carefully, then he scratched
his head, rose and shook himself.

His movement gave the girl a little start--she had forgotten Akut for
the moment.  Again she shrank from him.  The beast saw that she feared
him, and being a brute enjoyed the evidence of the terror his
brutishness inspired.  Crouching, he extended his huge hand stealthily
toward her, as though to seize her.  She shrank still further away.
Akut's eyes were busy drinking in the humor of the situation--he did
not see the narrowing eyes of the boy upon him, nor the shortening neck
as the broad shoulders rose in a characteristic attitude of preparation
for attack.  As the ape's fingers were about to close upon the girl's
arm the youth rose suddenly with a short, vicious growl.  A clenched
fist flew before Meriem's eyes to land full upon the snout of the
astonished Akut.  With an explosive bellow the anthropoid reeled
backward and tumbled from the tree.

Korak stood glaring down upon him when a sudden swish in the bushes
close by attracted his attention.  The girl too was looking down; but
she saw nothing but the angry ape scrambling to his feet.  Then, like a
bolt from a cross bow, a mass of spotted, yellow fur shot into view
straight for Akut's back.  It was Sheeta, the leopard.




Chapter 10


As the leopard leaped for the great ape Meriem gasped in surprise and
horror--not for the impending fate of the anthropoid, but at the act of
the youth who but an instant before had angrily struck his strange
companion; for scarce had the carnivore burst into view than with drawn
knife the youth had leaped far out above him, so that as Sheeta was
almost in the act of sinking fangs and talons in Akut's broad back The
Killer landed full upon the leopard's shoulders.

The cat halted in mid air, missed the ape by but a hair's breadth, and
with horrid snarlings rolled over upon its back, clutching and clawing
in an effort to reach and dislodge the antagonist biting at its neck
and knifing it in the side.

Akut, startled by the sudden rush from his rear, and following hoary
instinct, was in the tree beside the girl with an agility little short
of marvelous in so heavy a beast.  But the moment that he turned to see
what was going on below him brought him as quickly to the ground again.
Personal differences were quickly forgotten in the danger which menaced
his human companion, nor was he a whit less eager to jeopardize his own
safety in the service of his friend than Korak had been to succor him.

The result was that Sheeta presently found two ferocious creatures
tearing him to ribbons.  Shrieking, snarling and growling, the three
rolled hither and thither among the underbrush, while with staring eyes
the sole spectator of the battle royal crouched trembling in the tree
above them hugging Geeka frantically to her breast.

It was the boy's knife which eventually decided the battle, and as the
fierce feline shuddered convulsively and rolled over upon its side the
youth and the ape rose and faced one another across the prostrate
carcass.  Korak jerked his head in the direction of the little girl in
the tree.

"Leave her alone," he said; "she is mine."

Akut grunted, blinked his blood-shot eyes, and turned toward the body
of Sheeta.  Standing erect upon it he threw out his great chest, raised
his face toward the heavens and gave voice to so horrid a scream that
once again the little girl shuddered and shrank.  It was the victory
cry of the bull ape that has made a kill.  The boy only looked on for a
moment in silence; then he leaped into the tree again to the girl's
side.  Akut presently rejoined them.  For a few minutes he busied
himself licking his wounds, then he wandered off to hunt his breakfast.

For many months the strange life of the three went on unmarked by any
unusual occurrences.  At least without any occurrences that seemed
unusual to the youth or the ape; but to the little girl it was a
constant nightmare of horrors for days and weeks, until she too became
accustomed to gazing into the eyeless sockets of death and to the feel
of the icy wind of his shroud-like mantle.  Slowly she learned the
rudiments of the only common medium of thought exchange which her
companions possessed--the language of the great apes.  More quickly she
perfected herself in jungle craft, so that the time soon came when she
was an important factor in the chase, watching while the others slept,
or helping them to trace the spoor of whatever prey they might be
stalking.  Akut accepted her on a footing which bordered upon equality
when it was necessary for them to come into close contact; but for the
most part he avoided her.  The youth always was kind to her, and if
there were many occasions upon which he felt the burden of her presence
he hid it from her.  Finding that the night damp and chill caused her
discomfort and even suffering, Korak constructed a tight little shelter
high among the swaying branches of a giant tree.  Here little Meriem
slept in comparative warmth and safety, while The Killer and the ape
perched upon near-by branches, the former always before the entrance to
the lofty domicile, where he best could guard its inmate from the
dangers of arboreal enemies.  They were too high to feel much fear of
Sheeta; but there was always Histah, the snake, to strike terror to
one's soul, and the great baboons who lived near-by, and who, while
never attacking always bared their fangs and barked at any of the trio
when they passed near them.

After the construction of the shelter the activities of the three
became localized.  They ranged less widely, for there was always the
necessity of returning to their own tree at nightfall.  A river flowed
near by.  Game and fruit were plentiful, as were fish also.  Existence
had settled down to the daily humdrum of the wild--the search for food
and the sleeping upon full bellies.  They looked no further ahead than
today.  If the youth thought of his past and of those who longed for
him in the distant metropolis it was in a detached and impersonal sort
of way as though that other life belonged to another creature than
himself.  He had given up hope of returning to civilization, for since
his various rebuffs at the hands of those to whom he had looked for
friendship he had wandered so far inland as to realize that he was
completely lost in the mazes of the jungle.

Then, too, since the coming of Meriem he had found in her that one
thing which he had most missed before in his savage, jungle life--human
companionship.  In his friendship for her there was appreciable no
trace of sex influence of which he was cognizant.  They were
friends--companions--that was all.  Both might have been boys, except
for the half tender and always masterful manifestation of the
protective instinct which was apparent in Korak's attitude.

The little girl idolized him as she might have idolized an indulgent
brother had she had one.  Love was a thing unknown to either; but as
the youth neared manhood it was inevitable that it should come to him
as it did to every other savage, jungle male.

As Meriem became proficient in their common language the pleasures of
their companionship grew correspondingly, for now they could converse
and aided by the mental powers of their human heritage they amplified
the restricted vocabulary of the apes until talking was transformed
from a task into an enjoyable pastime.  When Korak hunted, Meriem
usually accompanied him, for she had learned the fine art of silence,
when silence was desirable.  She could pass through the branches of the
great trees now with all the agility and stealth of The Killer himself.
Great heights no longer appalled her.  She swung from limb to limb, or
she raced through the mighty branches, surefooted, lithe, and fearless.
Korak was very proud of her, and even old Akut grunted in approval
where before he had growled in contempt.

A distant village of blacks had furnished her with a mantle of fur and
feathers, with copper ornaments, and weapons, for Korak would not
permit her to go unarmed, or unversed in the use of the weapons he
stole for her.  A leather thong over one shoulder supported the ever
present Geeka who was still the recipient of her most sacred
confidences.  A light spear and a long knife were her weapons of
offense or defense.  Her body, rounding into the fulness of an early
maturity, followed the lines of a Greek goddess; but there the
similarity ceased, for her face was beautiful.

As she grew more accustomed to the jungle and the ways of its wild
denizens fear left her.  As time wore on she even hunted alone when
Korak and Akut were prowling at a great distance, as they were
sometimes forced to do when game was scarce in their immediate
vicinity.  Upon these occasions she usually confined her endeavors to
the smaller animals though sometimes she brought down a deer, and once
even Horta, the boar--a great tusker that even Sheeta might have
thought twice before attacking.

In their stamping grounds in the jungle the three were familiar
figures.  The little monkeys knew them well, often coming close to
chatter and frolic about them.  When Akut was by, the small folk kept
their distance, but with Korak they were less shy and when both the
males were gone they would come close to Meriem, tugging at her
ornaments or playing with Geeka, who was a never ending source of
amusement to them.  The girl played with them and fed them, and when
she was alone they helped her to pass the long hours until Korak's
return.

Nor were they worthless as friends.  In the hunt they helped her locate
her quarry.  Often they would come racing through the trees to her side
to announce the near presence of antelope or giraffe, or with excited
warnings of the proximity of Sheeta or Numa.  Luscious, sun-kissed
fruits which hung far out upon the frail bough of the jungle's waving
crest were brought to her by these tiny, nimble allies.  Sometimes they
played tricks upon her; but she was always kind and gentle with them
and in their wild, half-human way they were kind to her and
affectionate.  Their language being similar to that of the great apes
Meriem could converse with them though the poverty of their vocabulary
rendered these exchanges anything but feasts of reason.  For familiar
objects they had names, as well as for those conditions which induced
pain or pleasure, joy, sorrow, or rage.  These root words were so
similar to those in use among the great anthropoids as to suggest that
the language of the Manus was the mother tongue.  At best it lent
itself to but material and sordid exchange.  Dreams, aspirations, hopes,
the past, the future held no place in the conversation of Manu, the
monkey. All was of the present--particularly of filling his belly and
catching lice.

Poor food was this to nourish the mental appetite of a girl just upon
the brink of womanhood.  And so, finding Manu only amusing as an
occasional playfellow or pet, Meriem poured out her sweetest soul
thoughts into the deaf ears of Geeka's ivory head.  To Geeka she spoke
in Arabic, knowing that Geeka, being but a doll, could not understand
the language of Korak and Akut, and that the language of Korak and Akut
being that of male apes contained nothing of interest to an Arab doll.

Geeka had undergone a transformation since her little mother had left
the village of The Sheik.  Her garmenture now reflected in miniature
that of Meriem.  A tiny bit of leopard skin covered her ratskin torso
from shoulder to splinter knee.  A band of braided grasses about her
brow held in place a few gaudy feathers from the parakeet, while other
bits of grass were fashioned into imitations of arm and leg ornaments
of metal.  Geeka was a perfect little savage; but at heart she was
unchanged, being the same omnivorous listener as of yore.  An excellent
trait in Geeka was that she never interrupted in order to talk about
herself.  Today was no exception.  She had been listening attentively
to Meriem for an hour, propped against the bole of a tree while her
lithe, young mistress stretched catlike and luxurious along a swaying
branch before her.

"Little Geeka," said Meriem, "our Korak has been gone for a long time
today.  We miss him, little Geeka, do we not?  It is dull and lonesome
in the great jungle when our Korak is away.  What will he bring us this
time, eh?  Another shining band of metal for Meriem's ankle?  Or a
soft, doeskin loin cloth from the body of a black she?  He tells me
that it is harder to get the possessions of the shes, for he will not
kill them as he does the males, and they fight savagely when he leaps
upon them to wrest their ornaments from them.  Then come the males with
spears and arrows and Korak takes to the trees.  Sometimes he takes the
she with him and high among the branches divests her of the things he
wishes to bring home to Meriem.  He says that the blacks fear him now,
and at first sight of him the women and children run shrieking to their
huts; but he follows them within, and it is not often that he returns
without arrows for himself and a present for Meriem.  Korak is mighty
among the jungle people--our Korak, Geeka--no, MY Korak!"

Meriem's conversation was interrupted by the sudden plunge of an
excited little monkey that landed upon her shoulders in a flying leap
from a neighboring tree.

"Climb!" he cried.  "Climb!  The Mangani are coming."

Meriem glanced lazily over her shoulder at the excited disturber of her
peace.

"Climb, yourself, little Manu," she said.  "The only Mangani in our
jungle are Korak and Akut.  It is they you have seen returning from the
hunt.  Some day you will see your own shadow, little Manu, and then you
will be frightened to death."

But the monkey only screamed his warning more lustily before he raced
upward toward the safety of the high terrace where Mangani, the great
ape, could not follow.  Presently Meriem heard the sound of approaching
bodies swinging through the trees.  She listened attentively.  There
were two and they were great apes--Korak and Akut.  To her Korak was an
ape--a Mangani, for as such the three always described themselves.  Man
was an enemy, so they did not think of themselves as belonging any
longer to the same genus.  Tarmangani, or great white ape, which
described the white man in their language, did not fit them all.
Gomangani--great black ape, or Negro--described none of them so they
called themselves plain Mangani.

Meriem decided that she would feign slumber and play a joke on Korak.
So she lay very still with eyes tightly closed.  She heard the two
approaching closer and closer.  They were in the adjoining tree now and
must have discovered her, for they had halted.  Why were they so quiet?
Why did not Korak call out his customary greeting?  The quietness was
ominous.  It was followed presently by a very stealthy sound--one of
them was creeping upon her.  Was Korak planning a joke upon his own
account?  Well, she would fool him.  Cautiously she opened her eyes the
tiniest bit, and as she did so her heart stood still.  Creeping
silently toward her was a huge bull ape that she never before had seen.
Behind him was another like him.

With the agility of a squirrel Meriem was upon her feet and at the same
instant the great bull lunged for her.  Leaping from limb to limb the
girl fled through the jungle while close behind her came the two great
apes.  Above them raced a bevy of screaming, chattering monkeys,
hurling taunts and insults at the Mangani, and encouragement and advice
to the girl.

From tree to tree swung Meriem working ever upward toward the smaller
branches which would not bear the weight of her pursuers.  Faster and
faster came the bull apes after her.  The clutching fingers of the
foremost were almost upon her again and again, but she eluded them by
sudden bursts of speed or reckless chances as she threw herself across
dizzy spaces.

Slowly she was gaining her way to the greater heights where safety lay,
when, after a particularly daring leap, the swaying branch she grasped
bent low beneath her weight, nor whipped upward again as it should have
done.  Even before the rending sound which followed Meriem knew that
she had misjudged the strength of the limb.  It gave slowly at first.
Then there was a ripping as it parted from the trunk.  Releasing her
hold Meriem dropped among the foliage beneath, clutching for a new
support.  She found it a dozen feet below the broken limb.  She had
fallen thus many times before, so that she had no particular terror of
a fall--it was the delay which appalled her most, and rightly, for
scarce had she scrambled to a place of safety than the body of the huge
ape dropped at her side and a great, hairy arm went about her waist.

Almost at once the other ape reached his companion's side.  He made a
lunge at Meriem; but her captor swung her to one side, bared his
fighting fangs and growled ominously.  Meriem struggled to escape.  She
struck at the hairy breast and bearded cheek.  She fastened her strong,
white teeth in one shaggy forearm.  The ape cuffed her viciously across
the face, then he had to turn his attention to his fellow who quite
evidently desired the prize for his own.

The captor could not fight to advantage upon the swaying bough,
burdened as he was by a squirming, struggling captive, so he dropped
quickly to the ground beneath.  The other followed him, and here they
fought, occasionally abandoning their duel to pursue and recapture the
girl who took every advantage of her captors' preoccupation in battle
to break away in attempted escape; but always they overtook her, and
first one and then the other possessed her as they struggled to tear
one another to pieces for the prize.

Often the girl came in for many blows that were intended for a hairy
foe, and once she was felled, lying unconscious while the apes,
relieved of the distraction of detaining her by force, tore into one
another in fierce and terrible combat.

Above them screamed the little monkeys, racing hither and thither in a
frenzy of hysterical excitement.  Back and forth over the battle field
flew countless birds of gorgeous plumage, squawking their hoarse cries
of rage and defiance.  In the distance a lion roared.

The larger bull was slowly tearing his antagonist to pieces.  They
rolled upon the ground biting and striking.  Again, erect upon their
hind legs they pulled and tugged like human wrestlers; but always the
giant fangs found their bloody part to play until both combatants and
the ground about them were red with gore.

Meriem, through it all, lay still and unconscious upon the ground.  At
last one found a permanent hold upon the jugular of the other and thus
they went down for the last time.  For several minutes they lay with
scarce a struggle.  It was the larger bull who arose alone from the
last embrace.  He shook himself.  A deep growl rumbled from his hairy
throat.  He waddled back and forth between the body of the girl and
that of his vanquished foe.  Then he stood upon the latter and gave
tongue to his hideous challenge.  The little monkeys broke, screaming,
in all directions as the terrifying noise broke upon their ears.  The
gorgeous birds took wing and fled.  Once again the lion roared, this
time at a greater distance.

The great ape waddled once more to the girl's side.  He turned her over
upon her back, and stooping commenced to sniff and listen about her
face and breast.  She lived.  The monkeys were returning.  They came in
swarms, and from above hurled down insults upon the victor.

The ape showed his displeasure by baring his teeth and growling up at
them.  Then he stooped and lifting the girl to his shoulder waddled off
through the jungle.  In his wake followed the angry mob.




Chapter 11


Korak, returning from the hunt, heard the jabbering of the excited
monkeys.  He knew that something was seriously amiss.  Histah, the
snake, had doubtless coiled his slimy folds about some careless Manu.
The youth hastened ahead.  The monkeys were Meriem's friends.  He would
help them if he could.  He traveled rapidly along the middle terrace.
In the tree by Meriem's shelter he deposited his trophies of the hunt
and called aloud to her.  There was no answer.  He dropped quickly to a
lower level.  She might be hiding from him.

Upon a great branch where Meriem often swung at indolent ease he saw
Geeka propped against the tree's great bole.  What could it mean?
Meriem had never left Geeka thus alone before.  Korak picked up the
doll and tucked it in his belt.  He called again, more loudly; but no
Meriem answered his summons.  In the distance the jabbering of the
excited Manus was growing less distinct.

Could their excitement be in any way connected with Meriem's
disappearance?  The bare thought was enough.  Without waiting for Akut
who was coming slowly along some distance in his rear, Korak swung
rapidly in the direction of the chattering mob.  But a few minutes
sufficed to overtake the rearmost.  At sight of him they fell to
screaming and pointing downward ahead of them, and a moment later Korak
came within sight of the cause of their rage.

The youth's heart stood still in terror as he saw the limp body of the
girl across the hairy shoulders of a great ape.  That she was dead he
did not doubt, and in that instant there arose within him a something
which he did not try to interpret nor could have had he tried; but all
at once the whole world seemed centered in that tender, graceful body,
that frail little body, hanging so pitifully limp and helpless across
the bulging shoulders of the brute.

He knew then that little Meriem was his world--his sun, his moon, his
stars--with her going had gone all light and warmth and happiness.  A
groan escaped his lips, and after that a series of hideous roars, more
bestial than the beasts', as he dropped plummet-like in mad descent
toward the perpetrator of this hideous crime.

The bull ape turned at the first note of this new and menacing voice,
and as he turned a new flame was added to the rage and hatred of The
Killer, for he saw that the creature before him was none other than the
king ape which had driven him away from the great anthropoids to whom
he had looked for friendship and asylum.

Dropping the body of the girl to the ground the bull turned to battle
anew for possession of his expensive prize; but this time he looked for
an easy conquest.  He too recognized Korak.  Had he not chased him away
from the amphitheater without even having to lay a fang or paw upon
him?  With lowered head and bulging shoulders he rushed headlong for
the smooth-skinned creature who was daring to question his right to his
prey.

They met head on like two charging bulls, to go down together tearing
and striking.  Korak forgot his knife.  Rage and bloodlust such as his
could be satisfied only by the feel of hot flesh between rending fangs,
by the gush of new life blood against his bare skin, for, though he did
not realize it, Korak, The Killer, was fighting for something more
compelling than hate or revenge--he was a great male fighting another
male for a she of his own kind.

So impetuous was the attack of the man-ape that he found his hold
before the anthropoid could prevent him--a savage hold, with strong
jaws closed upon a pulsing jugular, and there he clung, with closed
eyes, while his fingers sought another hold upon the shaggy throat.

It was then that Meriem opened her eyes.  At the sight before her they
went wide.

"Korak!" she cried.  "Korak!  My Korak!  I knew that you would come.
Kill him, Korak!  Kill him!"  And with flashing eyes and heaving bosom
the girl, coming to her feet, ran to Korak's side to encourage him.
Nearby lay The Killer's spear, where he had flung it as he charged the
ape.  The girl saw it and snatched it up.  No faintness overcame her in
the face of this battle primeval at her feet.  For her there was no
hysterical reaction from the nerve strain of her own personal encounter
with the bull.  She was excited; but cool and entirely unafraid.  Her
Korak was battling with another Mangani that would have stolen her; but
she did not seek the safety of an overhanging bough there to watch the
battle from afar, as would a she Mangani.  Instead she placed the point
of Korak's spear against the bull ape's side and plunged the sharp
point deep into the savage heart.  Korak had not needed her aid, for
the great bull had been already as good as dead, with the blood gushing
from his torn jugular; but Korak rose smiling with a word of
approbation for his helper.

How tall and fine she was!  Had she changed suddenly within the few
hours of his absence, or had his battle with the ape affected his
vision?  He might have been looking at Meriem through new eyes for the
many startling and wonderful surprises his gaze revealed.  How long it
had been since he had found her in her father's village, a little Arab
girl, he did not know, for time is of no import in the jungle and so he
had kept no track of the passing days.  But he realized, as he looked
upon her now, that she was no longer such a little girl as he had first
seen playing with Geeka beneath the great tree just within the
palisade.  The change must have been very gradual to have eluded his
notice until now.  And what was it that had caused him to realize it so
suddenly?  His gaze wandered from the girl to the body of the dead
bull.  For the first time there flashed to his understanding the
explanation of the reason for the girl's attempted abduction.  Korak's
eyes went wide and then they closed to narrow slits of rage as he stood
glaring down upon the abysmal brute at his feet.  When next his glance
rose to Meriem's face a slow flush suffused his own.  Now, indeed, was
he looking upon her through new eyes--the eyes of a man looking upon a
maid.

Akut had come up just as Meriem had speared Korak's antagonist.  The
exultation of the old ape was keen.  He strutted, stiff-legged and
truculent about the body of the fallen enemy.  He growled and upcurved
his long, flexible lip.  His hair bristled.  He was paying no attention
to Meriem and Korak.  Back in the uttermost recesses of his little
brain something was stirring--something which the sight and smell of
the great bull had aroused.  The outward manifestation of the
germinating idea was one of bestial rage; but the inner sensations were
pleasurable in the extreme.  The scent of the great bull and the sight
of his huge and hairy figure had wakened in the heart of Akut a longing
for the companionship of his own kind.  So Korak was not alone
undergoing a change.

And Meriem?  She was a woman.  It is woman's divine right to love.
Always she had loved Korak.  He was her big brother.  Meriem alone
underwent no change.  She was still happy in the companionship of her
Korak.  She still loved him--as a sister loves an indulgent
brother--and she was very, very proud of him.  In all the jungle there
was no other creature so strong, so handsome, or so brave.

Korak came close to her.  There was a new light in his eyes as she
looked up into them; but she did not understand it.  She did not
realize how close they were to maturity, nor aught of all the
difference in their lives the look in Korak's eyes might mean.

"Meriem," he whispered and his voice was husky as he laid a brown hand
upon her bare shoulder.  "Meriem!"  Suddenly he crushed her to him.
She looked up into his face, laughing, and then he bent and kissed her
full upon the mouth.  Even then she did not understand.  She did not
recall ever having been kissed before.  It was very nice.  Meriem liked
it.  She thought it was Korak's way of showing how glad he was that the
great ape had not succeeded in running away with her.  She was glad
too, so she put her arms about The Killer's neck and kissed him again
and again.  Then, discovering the doll in his belt she transferred it
to her own possession, kissing it as she had kissed Korak.

Korak wanted her to say something.  He wanted to tell her how he loved
her; but the emotion of his love choked him and the vocabulary of the
Mangani was limited.

There came a sudden interruption.  It was from Akut--a sudden, low
growl, no louder than those he had been giving vent to the while he
pranced about the dead bull, nor half so loud in fact; but of a timbre
that bore straight to the perceptive faculties of the jungle beast
ingrained in Korak.  It was a warning.  Korak looked quickly up from
the glorious vision of the sweet face so close to his.  Now his other
faculties awoke.  His ears, his nostrils were on the alert.  Something
was coming!

The Killer moved to Akut's side.  Meriem was just behind them.  The
three stood like carved statues gazing into the leafy tangle of the
jungle.  The noise that had attracted their attention increased, and
presently a great ape broke through the underbrush a few paces from
where they stood.  The beast halted at sight of them.  He gave a
warning grunt back over his shoulder, and a moment later coming
cautiously another bull appeared.  He was followed by others--both
bulls and females with young, until two score hairy monsters stood
glaring at the three.  It was the tribe of the dead king ape.  Akut was
the first to speak.  He pointed to the body of the dead bull.

"Korak, mighty fighter, has killed your king," he grunted.  "There is
none greater in all the jungle than Korak, son of Tarzan.  Now Korak is
king.  What bull is greater than Korak?"  It was a challenge to any
bull who might care to question Korak's right to the kingship.  The
apes jabbered and chattered and growled among themselves for a time.
At last a young bull came slowly forward rocking upon his short legs,
bristling, growling, terrible.

The beast was enormous, and in the full prime of his strength.  He
belonged to that almost extinct species for which white men have long
sought upon the information of the natives of the more inaccessible
jungles.  Even the natives seldom see these great, hairy, primordial
men.

Korak advanced to meet the monster.  He, too, was growling.  In his
mind a plan was revolving.  To close with this powerful, untired brute
after having just passed through a terrific battle with another of his
kind would have been to tempt defeat.  He must find an easier way to
victory.  Crouching, he prepared to meet the charge which he knew would
soon come, nor did he have long to wait.  His antagonist paused only
for sufficient time to permit him to recount for the edification of the
audience and the confounding of Korak a brief resume of his former
victories, of his prowess, and of what he was about to do to this puny
Tarmangani.  Then he charged.

With clutching fingers and wide opened jaws he came down upon the
waiting Korak with the speed of an express train.  Korak did not move
until the great arms swung to embrace him, then he dropped low beneath
them, swung a terrific right to the side of the beast's jaw as he
side-stepped his rushing body, and swinging quickly about stood ready
over the fallen ape where he sprawled upon the ground.

It was a surprised anthropoid that attempted to scramble to its feet.
Froth flecked its hideous lips.  Red were the little eyes.  Blood
curdling roars tumbled from the deep chest.  But it did not reach its
feet.  The Killer stood waiting above it, and the moment that the hairy
chin came upon the proper level another blow that would have felled an
ox sent the ape over backward.

Again and again the beast struggled to arise, but each time the mighty
Tarmangani stood waiting with ready fist and pile driver blow to bowl
him over.  Weaker and weaker became the efforts of the bull.  Blood
smeared his face and breast.  A red stream trickled from nose and
mouth.  The crowd that had cheered him on at first with savage yells,
now jeered him--their approbation was for the Tarmangani.

"Kagoda?" inquired Korak, as he sent the bull down once more.

Again the stubborn bull essayed to scramble to his feet.  Again The
Killer struck him a terrific blow.  Again he put the question,
kagoda--have you had enough?

For a moment the bull lay motionless.  Then from between battered lips
came the single word: "Kagoda!"

"Then rise and go back among your people," said Korak.  "I do not wish
to be king among people who once drove me from them.  Keep your own
ways, and we will keep ours.  When we meet we may be friends, but we
shall not live together."

An old bull came slowly toward The Killer.

"You have killed our king," he said.  "You have defeated him who would
have been king.  You could have killed him had you wished.  What shall
we do for a king?"

Korak turned toward Akut.

"There is your king," he said.  But Akut did not want to be separated
from Korak, although he was anxious enough to remain with his own kind.
He wanted Korak to remain, too.  He said as much.

The youth was thinking of Meriem--of what would be best and safest for
her.  If Akut went away with the apes there would be but one to watch
over and protect her.  On the other hand were they to join the tribe he
would never feel safe to leave Meriem behind when he went out to hunt,
for the passions of the ape-folk are not ever well controlled.  Even a
female might develop an insane hatred for the slender white girl and
kill her during Korak's absence.

"We will live near you," he said, at last.  "When you change your
hunting ground we will change ours, Meriem and I, and so remain near
you; but we shall not dwell among you."

Akut raised objections to this plan.  He did not wish to be separated
from Korak.  At first he refused to leave his human friend for the
companionship of his own kind; but when he saw the last of the tribe
wandering off into the jungle again and his glance rested upon the
lithe figure of the dead king's young mate as she cast admiring glances
at her lord's successor the call of blood would not be denied.  With a
farewell glance toward his beloved Korak he turned and followed the she
ape into the labyrinthine mazes of the wood.


After Korak had left the village of the blacks following his last
thieving expedition, the screams of his victim and those of the other
women and children had brought the warriors in from the forest and the
river.  Great was the excitement and hot was the rage of the men when
they learned that the white devil had again entered their homes,
frightened their women and stolen arrows and ornaments and food.

Even their superstitious fear of this weird creature who hunted with a
huge bull ape was overcome in their desire to wreak vengeance upon him
and rid themselves for good and all of the menace of his presence in
the jungle.

And so it was that a score of the fleetest and most doughty warriors of
the tribe set out in pursuit of Korak and Akut but a few minutes after
they had left the scene of The Killer's many depredations.

The youth and the ape had traveled slowly and with no precautions
against a successful pursuit.  Nor was their attitude of careless
indifference to the blacks at all remarkable.  So many similar raids
had gone unpunished that the two had come to look upon the Negroes with
contempt.  The return journey led them straight up wind.  The result
being that the scent of their pursuers was borne away from them, so
they proceeded upon their way in total ignorance of the fact that
tireless trackers but little less expert in the mysteries of woodcraft
than themselves were dogging their trail with savage insistence.

The little party of warriors was led by Kovudoo, the chief; a
middle-aged savage of exceptional cunning and bravery.  It was he who
first came within sight of the quarry which they had followed for hours
by the mysterious methods of their almost uncanny powers of
observation, intuition, and even scent.

Kovudoo and his men came upon Korak, Akut and Meriem after the killing
of the king ape, the noise of the combat having led them at last
straight to their quarry.  The sight of the slender white girl had
amazed the savage chief and held him gazing at the trio for a moment
before ordering his warriors to rush out upon their prey.  In that
moment it was that the great apes came and again the blacks remained
awestruck witnesses to the palaver, and the battle between Korak and
the young bull.

But now the apes had gone, and the white youth and the white maid stood
alone in the jungle.  One of Kovudoo's men leaned close to the ear of
his chief.  "Look!" he whispered, and pointed to something that dangled
at the girl's side.  "When my brother and I were slaves in the village
of The Sheik my brother made that thing for The Sheik's little
daughter--she played with it always and called it after my brother,
whose name is Geeka.  Just before we escaped some one came and struck
down The Sheik, stealing his daughter away.  If this is she The Sheik
will pay you well for her return."

Korak's arm had again gone around the shoulders of Meriem.  Love raced
hot through his young veins.  Civilization was but a half-remembered
state--London as remote as ancient Rome.  In all the world there were
but they two--Korak, The Killer, and Meriem, his mate.  Again he drew
her close to him and covered her willing lips with his hot kisses.  And
then from behind him broke a hideous bedlam of savage war cries and a
score of shrieking blacks were upon them.

Korak turned to give battle.  Meriem with her own light spear stood by
his side.  An avalanche of barbed missiles flew about them.  One
pierced Korak's shoulder, another his leg, and he went down.

Meriem was unscathed for the blacks had intentionally spared her.  Now
they rushed forward to finish Korak and make good the girl's capture;
but as they came there came also from another point in the jungle the
great Akut and at his heels the huge bulls of his new kingdom.

Snarling and roaring they rushed upon the black warriors when they saw
the mischief they had already wrought.  Kovudoo, realizing the danger
of coming to close quarters with these mighty ape-men, seized Meriem
and called upon his warriors to retreat.  For a time the apes followed
them, and several of the blacks were badly mauled and one killed before
they succeeded in escaping.  Nor would they have gotten off thus easily
had Akut not been more concerned with the condition of the wounded
Korak than with the fate of the girl upon whom he had always looked as
more or less of an interloper and an unquestioned burden.

Korak lay bleeding and unconscious when Akut reached his side.  The
great ape tore the heavy spears from his flesh, licked the wounds and
then carried his friend to the lofty shelter that Korak had constructed
for Meriem.  Further than this the brute could do nothing.  Nature must
accomplish the rest unaided or Korak must die.

He did not die, however.  For days he lay helpless with fever, while
Akut and the apes hunted close by that they might protect him from such
birds and beasts as might reach his lofty retreat.  Occasionally Akut
brought him juicy fruits which helped to slake his thirst and allay his
fever, and little by little his powerful constitution overcame the
effects of the spear thrusts.  The wounds healed and his strength
returned.  All during his rational moments as he had lain upon the soft
furs which lined Meriem's nest he had suffered more acutely from fears
for Meriem than from the pain of his own wounds.  For her he must live.
For her he must regain his strength that he might set out in search of
her.  What had the blacks done to her?  Did she still live, or had they
sacrificed her to their lust for torture and human flesh?  Korak almost
trembled with terror as the most hideous possibilities of the girl's
fate suggested themselves to him out of his knowledge of the customs of
Kovudoo's tribe.

The days dragged their weary lengths along, but at last he had
sufficiently regained his strength to crawl from the shelter and make
his way unaided to the ground.  Now he lived more upon raw meat, for
which he was entirely dependent on Akut's skill and generosity.  With
the meat diet his strength returned more rapidly, and at last he felt
that he was fit to undertake the journey to the village of the blacks.




Chapter 12


Two tall, bearded white men moved cautiously through the jungle from
their camp beside a wide river.  They were Carl Jenssen and Sven
Malbihn, but little altered in appearance since the day, years before,
that they and their safari had been so badly frightened by Korak and
Akut as the former sought haven with them.

Every year had they come into the jungle to trade with the natives, or
to rob them; to hunt and trap; or to guide other white men in the land
they knew so well.  Always since their experience with The Sheik had
they operated at a safe distance from his territory.

Now they were closer to his village than they had been for years, yet
safe enough from discovery owing to the uninhabited nature of the
intervening jungle and the fear and enmity of Kovudoo's people for The
Sheik, who, in time past, had raided and all but exterminated the tribe.

This year they had come to trap live specimens for a European
zoological garden, and today they were approaching a trap which they
had set in the hope of capturing a specimen of the large baboons that
frequented the neighborhood.  As they approached the trap they became
aware from the noises emanating from its vicinity that their efforts
had been crowned with success.  The barking and screaming of hundreds
of baboons could mean naught else than that one or more of their number
had fallen a victim to the allurements of the bait.

The extreme caution of the two men was prompted by former experiences
with the intelligent and doglike creatures with which they had to deal.
More than one trapper has lost his life in battle with enraged baboons
who will hesitate to attack nothing upon one occasion, while upon
another a single gun shot will disperse hundreds of them.

Heretofore the Swedes had always watched near-by their trap, for as a
rule only the stronger bulls are thus caught, since in their greediness
they prevent the weaker from approaching the covered bait, and when
once within the ordinary rude trap woven on the spot of interlaced
branches they are able, with the aid of their friends upon the outside,
to demolish their prison and escape.  But in this instance the trappers
had utilized a special steel cage which could withstand all the
strength and cunning of a baboon.  It was only necessary, therefore, to
drive away the herd which they knew were surrounding the prison and
wait for their boys who were even now following them to the trap.

As they came within sight of the spot they found conditions precisely
as they had expected.  A large male was battering frantically against
the steel wires of the cage that held him captive.  Upon the outside
several hundred other baboons were tearing and tugging in his aid, and
all were roaring and jabbering and barking at the top of their lungs.

But what neither the Swedes nor the baboons saw was the half-naked
figure of a youth hidden in the foliage of a nearby tree.  He had come
upon the scene at almost the same instant as Jenssen and Malbihn, and
was watching the activities of the baboons with every mark of interest.

Korak's relations with the baboons had never been over friendly.  A
species of armed toleration had marked their occasional meetings.  The
baboons and Akut had walked stiff legged and growling past one another,
while Korak had maintained a bared fang neutrality.  So now he was not
greatly disturbed by the predicament of their king.  Curiosity prompted
him to tarry a moment, and in that moment his quick eyes caught the
unfamiliar coloration of the clothing of the two Swedes behind a bush
not far from him.  Now he was all alertness.  Who were these
interlopers?  What was their business in the jungle of the Mangani?
Korak slunk noiselessly around them to a point where he might get their
scent as well as a better view of them, and scarce had he done so when
he recognized them--they were the men who had fired upon him years
before.  His eyes blazed.  He could feel the hairs upon his scalp
stiffen at the roots.  He watched them with the intentness of a panther
about to spring upon its prey.

He saw them rise and, shouting, attempt to frighten away the baboons as
they approached the cage.  Then one of them raised his rifle and fired
into the midst of the surprised and angry herd.  For an instant Korak
thought that the baboons were about to charge, but two more shots from
the rifles of the white men sent them scampering into the trees.  Then
the two Europeans advanced upon the cage.  Korak thought that they were
going to kill the king.  He cared nothing for the king but he cared
less for the two white men.  The king had never attempted to kill
him--the white men had.  The king was a denizen of his own beloved
jungle--the white men were aliens.  His loyalty therefore was to the
baboon against the human.  He could speak the language of the
baboon--it was identical to that of the great apes.  Across the
clearing he saw the jabbering horde watching.

Raising his voice he shouted to them.  The white men turned at the
sound of this new factor behind them.  They thought it was another
baboon that had circled them; but though they searched the trees with
their eyes they saw nothing of the now silent figure hidden by the
foliage.  Again Korak shouted.

"I am The Killer," he cried.  "These men are my enemies and yours.  I
will help you free your king.  Run out upon the strangers when you see
me do so, and together we will drive them away and free your king."

And from the baboons came a great chorus:  "We will do what you say,
Korak."

Dropping from his tree Korak ran toward the two Swedes, and at the same
instant three hundred baboons followed his example.  At sight of the
strange apparition of the half-naked white warrior rushing upon them
with uplifted spear Jenssen and Malbihn raised their rifles and fired
at Korak; but in the excitement both missed and a moment later the
baboons were upon them.  Now their only hope of safety lay in escape,
and dodging here and there, fighting off the great beasts that leaped
upon their backs, they ran into the jungle.  Even then they would have
died but for the coming of their men whom they met a couple of hundred
yards from the cage.

Once the white men had turned in flight Korak gave them no further
attention, turning instead to the imprisoned baboon.  The fastenings of
the door that had eluded the mental powers of the baboons, yielded
their secret immediately to the human intelligence of The Killer, and a
moment later the king baboon stepped forth to liberty.  He wasted no
breath in thanks to Korak, nor did the young man expect thanks.  He
knew that none of the baboons would ever forget his service, though as
a matter of fact he did not care if they did.  What he had done had
been prompted by a desire to be revenged upon the two white men.  The
baboons could never be of service to him.  Now they were racing in the
direction of the battle that was being waged between their fellows and
the followers of the two Swedes, and as the din of battle subsided in
the distance, Korak turned and resumed his journey toward the village
of Kovudoo.

On the way he came upon a herd of elephants standing in an open forest
glade.  Here the trees were too far apart to permit Korak to travel
through the branches--a trail he much preferred not only because of its
freedom from dense underbrush and the wider field of vision it gave him
but from pride in his arboreal ability.  It was exhilarating to swing
from tree to tree; to test the prowess of his mighty muscles; to reap
the pleasurable fruits of his hard won agility.  Korak joyed in the
thrills of the highflung upper terraces of the great forest, where,
unhampered and unhindered, he might laugh down upon the great brutes
who must keep forever to the darkness and the gloom of the musty soil.

But here, in this open glade where Tantor flapped his giant ears and
swayed his huge bulk from side to side, the ape-man must pass along the
surface of the ground--a pygmy amongst giants.  A great bull raised his
trunk to rattle a low warning as he sensed the coming of an intruder.
His weak eyes roved hither and thither but it was his keen scent and
acute hearing which first located the ape-man.  The herd moved
restlessly, prepared for fight, for the old bull had caught the scent
of man.

"Peace, Tantor," called The Killer.  "It is I, Korak, Tarmangani."

The bull lowered his trunk and the herd resumed their interrupted
meditations.  Korak passed within a foot of the great bull.  A sinuous
trunk undulated toward him, touching his brown hide in a half caress.
Korak slapped the great shoulder affectionately as he went by.  For
years he had been upon good terms with Tantor and his people.  Of all
the jungle folk he loved best the mighty pachyderm--the most peaceful
and at the same time the most terrible of them all.  The gentle gazelle
feared him not, yet Numa, lord of the jungle, gave him a wide berth.
Among the younger bulls, the cows and the calves Korak wound his way.
Now and then another trunk would run out to touch him, and once a
playful calf grasped his legs and upset him.

The afternoon was almost spent when Korak arrived at the village of
Kovudoo.  There were many natives lolling in shady spots beside the
conical huts or beneath the branches of the several trees which had
been left standing within the enclosure.  Warriors were in evidence
upon hand.  It was not a good time for a lone enemy to prosecute a
search through the village.  Korak determined to await the coming of
darkness.  He was a match for many warriors; but he could not, unaided,
overcome an entire tribe--not even for his beloved Meriem.  While he
waited among the branches and foliage of a near-by tree he searched the
village constantly with his keen eyes, and twice he circled it,
sniffing the vagrant breezes which puffed erratically from first one
point of the compass and then another.  Among the various stenches
peculiar to a native village the ape-man's sensitive nostrils were
finally rewarded by cognizance of the delicate aroma which marked the
presence of her he sought.  Meriem was there--in one of those huts!
But which one he could not know without closer investigation, and so he
waited, with the dogged patience of a beast of prey, until night had
fallen.

The camp fires of the blacks dotted the gloom with little points of
light, casting their feeble rays in tiny circles of luminosity that
brought into glistening relief the naked bodies of those who lay or
squatted about them.  It was then that Korak slid silently from the
tree that had hidden him and dropped lightly to the ground within the
enclosure.

Keeping well in the shadows of the huts he commenced a systematic
search of the village--ears, eyes and nose constantly upon the alert
for the first intimation of the near presence of Meriem.  His progress
must of necessity be slow since not even the keen-eared curs of the
savages must guess the presence of a stranger within the gates.  How
close he came to a detection on several occasions The Killer well knew
from the restless whining of several of them.

It was not until he reached the back of a hut at the head of the wide
village street that Korak caught again, plainly, the scent of Meriem.
With nose close to the thatched wall Korak sniffed eagerly about the
structure--tense and palpitant as a hunting hound.  Toward the front
and the door he made his way when once his nose had assured him that
Meriem lay within; but as he rounded the side and came within view of
the entrance he saw a burly Negro armed with a long spear squatting at
the portal of the girl's prison.  The fellow's back was toward him, his
figure outlined against the glow of cooking fires further down the
street.  He was alone.  The nearest of his fellows were beside a fire
sixty or seventy feet beyond.  To enter the hut Korak must either
silence the sentry or pass him unnoticed.  The danger in the
accomplishment of the former alternative lay in the practical certainty
of alarming the warriors near by and bringing them and the balance of
the village down upon him.  To achieve the latter appeared practically
impossible.  To you or me it would have been impossible; but Korak, The
Killer, was not as you or I.

There was a good twelve inches of space between the broad back of the
black and the frame of the doorway.  Could Korak pass through behind
the savage warrior without detection?  The light that fell upon the
glistening ebony of the sentry's black skin fell also upon the light
brown of Korak's.  Should one of the many further down the street
chance to look long in this direction they must surely note the tall,
light-colored, moving figure; but Korak depended upon their interest in
their own gossip to hold their attention fast where it already lay, and
upon the firelight near them to prevent them seeing too plainly at a
distance into the darkness at the village end where his work lay.

Flattened against the side of the hut, yet not arousing a single
warning rustle from its dried thatching, The Killer came closer and
closer to the watcher.  Now he was at his shoulder.  Now he had wormed
his sinuous way behind him.  He could feel the heat of the naked body
against his knees.  He could hear the man breathe.  He marveled that
the dull-witted creature had not long since been alarmed; but the
fellow sat there as ignorant of the presence of another as though that
other had not existed.

Korak moved scarcely more than an inch at a time, then he would stand
motionless for a moment.  Thus was he worming his way behind the guard
when the latter straightened up, opened his cavernous mouth in a wide
yawn, and stretched his arms above his head.  Korak stood rigid as
stone.  Another step and he would be within the hut.  The black lowered
his arms and relaxed.  Behind him was the frame work of the doorway.
Often before had it supported his sleepy head, and now he leaned back
to enjoy the forbidden pleasure of a cat nap.

But instead of the door frame his head and shoulders came in contact
with the warm flesh of a pair of living legs.  The exclamation of
surprise that almost burst from his lips was throttled in his throat by
steel-thewed fingers that closed about his windpipe with the suddenness
of thought.  The black struggled to arise--to turn upon the creature
that had seized him--to wriggle from its hold; but all to no purpose.
As he had been held in a mighty vise of iron he could not move.  He
could not scream. Those awful fingers at his throat but closed more and
more tightly.  His eyes bulged from their sockets.  His face turned an
ashy blue.  Presently he relaxed once more--this time in the final
dissolution from which there is no quickening.  Korak propped the dead
body against the door frame.  There it sat, lifelike in the gloom.
Then the ape-man turned and glided into the Stygian darkness of the
hut's interior.

"Meriem!" he whispered.

"Korak!  My Korak!" came an answering cry, subdued by fear of alarming
her captors, and half stifled by a sob of joyful welcome.

The youth knelt and cut the bonds that held the girl's wrists and
ankles.  A moment later he had lifted her to her feet, and grasping her
by the hand led her towards the entrance.  Outside the grim sentinel of
death kept his grisly vigil.  Sniffing at his dead feet whined a mangy
native cur.  At sight of the two emerging from the hut the beast gave
an ugly snarl and an instant later as it caught the scent of the
strange white man it raised a series of excited yelps.  Instantly the
warriors at the near-by fire were attracted.  They turned their heads
in the direction of the commotion.  It was impossible that they should
fail to see the white skins of the fugitives.

Korak slunk quickly into the shadows at the hut's side, drawing Meriem
with him; but he was too late.  The blacks had seen enough to arouse
their suspicions and a dozen of them were now running to investigate.
The yapping cur was still at Korak's heels leading the searchers
unerringly in pursuit.  The youth struck viciously at the brute with
his long spear; but, long accustomed to dodging blows, the wily
creature made a most uncertain target.

Other blacks had been alarmed by the running and shouting of their
companions and now the entire population of the village was swarming up
the street to assist in the search.  Their first discovery was the dead
body of the sentry, and a moment later one of the bravest of them had
entered the hut and discovered the absence of the prisoner.  These
startling announcements filled the blacks with a combination of terror
and rage; but, seeing no foe in evidence they were enabled to permit
their rage to get the better of their terror, and so the leaders,
pushed on by those behind them, ran rapidly around the hut in the
direction of the yapping of the mangy cur.  Here they found a single
white warrior making away with their captive, and recognizing him as
the author of numerous raids and indignities and believing that they
had him cornered and at a disadvantage, they charged savagely upon him.

Korak, seeing that they were discovered, lifted Meriem to his shoulders
and ran for the tree which would give them egress from the village.  He
was handicapped in his flight by the weight of the girl whose legs
would but scarce bear her weight, to say nothing of maintaining her in
rapid flight, for the tightly drawn bonds that had been about her
ankles for so long had stopped circulation and partially paralyzed her
extremities.

Had this not been the case the escape of the two would have been a feat
of little moment, since Meriem was scarcely a whit less agile than
Korak, and fully as much at home in the trees as he.  But with the girl
on his shoulder Korak could not both run and fight to advantage, and
the result was that before he had covered half the distance to the tree
a score of native curs attracted by the yelping of their mate and the
yells and shouts of their masters had closed in upon the fleeing white
man, snapping at his legs and at last succeeding in tripping him.  As
he went down the hyena-like brutes were upon him, and as he struggled
to his feet the blacks closed in.

A couple of them seized the clawing, biting Meriem, and subdued her--a
blow upon the head was sufficient.  For the ape-man they found more
drastic measures would be necessary.

Weighted down as he was by dogs and warriors he still managed to
struggle to his feet.  To right and left he swung crushing blows to the
faces of his human antagonists--to the dogs he paid not the slightest
attention other than to seize the more persistent and wring their necks
with a single quick movement of the wrist.

A knob stick aimed at him by an ebon Hercules he caught and wrested
from his antagonist, and then the blacks experienced to the full the
possibilities for punishment that lay within those smooth flowing
muscles beneath the velvet brown skin of the strange, white giant.  He
rushed among them with all the force and ferocity of a bull elephant
gone mad.  Hither and thither he charged striking down the few who had
the temerity to stand against him, and it was evident that unless a
chance spear thrust brought him down he would rout the entire village
and regain his prize.  But old Kovudoo was not to be so easily robbed
of the ransom which the girl represented, and seeing that their attack
which had up to now resulted in a series of individual combats with the
white warrior, he called his tribesmen off, and forming them in a
compact body about the girl and the two who watched over her bid them
do nothing more than repel the assaults of the ape-man.

Again and again Korak rushed against this human barricade bristling
with spear points.  Again and again he was repulsed, often with severe
wounds to caution him to greater wariness.  From head to foot he was
red with his own blood, and at last, weakening from the loss of it, he
came to the bitter realization that alone he could do no more to succor
his Meriem.

Presently an idea flashed through his brain.  He called aloud to the
girl.  She had regained consciousness now and replied.

"Korak goes," he shouted; "but he will return and take you from the
Gomangani.  Good-bye, my Meriem.  Korak will come for you again."

"Good-bye!" cried the girl.  "Meriem will look for you until you come."

Like a flash, and before they could know his intention or prevent him,
Korak wheeled, raced across the village and with a single leap
disappeared into the foliage of the great tree that was his highroad to
the village of Kovudoo.  A shower of spears followed him, but their
only harvest was a taunting laugh flung back from out the darkness of
the jungle.




Chapter 13


Meriem, again bound and under heavy guard in Kovudoo's own hut, saw the
night pass and the new day come without bringing the momentarily looked
for return of Korak.  She had no doubt but that he would come back and
less still that he would easily free her from her captivity.  To her
Korak was little short of omnipotent.  He embodied for her all that was
finest and strongest and best in her savage world.  She gloried in his
prowess and worshipped him for the tender thoughtfulness that always
had marked his treatment of her.  No other within the ken of her memory
had ever accorded her the love and gentleness that was his daily
offering to her.  Most of the gentler attributes of his early childhood
had long since been forgotten in the fierce battle for existence which
the customs of the mysterious jungle had forced upon him.  He was more
often savage and bloodthirsty than tender and kindly.  His other
friends of the wild looked for no gentle tokens of his affection.  That
he would hunt with them and fight for them was sufficient.  If he
growled and showed his fighting fangs when they trespassed upon his
inalienable rights to the fruits of his kills they felt no anger toward
him--only greater respect for the efficient and the fit--for him who
could not only kill but protect the flesh of his kill.

But toward Meriem he always had shown more of his human side.  He
killed primarily for her.  It was to the feet of Meriem that he brought
the fruits of his labors.  It was for Meriem more than for himself that
he squatted beside his flesh and growled ominously at whosoever dared
sniff too closely to it.  When he was cold in the dark days of rain, or
thirsty in a prolonged drouth, his discomfort engendered first of all
thoughts of Meriem's welfare--after she had been made warm, after her
thirst had been slaked, then he turned to the affair of ministering to
his own wants.

The softest skins fell gracefully from the graceful shoulders of his
Meriem.  The sweetest-scented grasses lined her bower where other soft,
furry pelts made hers the downiest couch in all the jungle.

What wonder then that Meriem loved her Korak?  But she loved him as a
little sister might love a big brother who was very good to her.  As
yet she knew naught of the love of a maid for a man.

So now as she lay waiting for him she dreamed of him and of all that he
meant to her.  She compared him with The Sheik, her father, and at
thought of the stern, grizzled, old Arab she shuddered.  Even the
savage blacks had been less harsh to her than he.  Not understanding
their tongue she could not guess what purpose they had in keeping her a
prisoner.  She knew that man ate man, and she had expected to be eaten;
but she had been with them for some time now and no harm had befallen
her.  She did not know that a runner had been dispatched to the distant
village of The Sheik to barter with him for a ransom.  She did not
know, nor did Kovudoo, that the runner had never reached his
destination--that he had fallen in with the safari of Jenssen and
Malbihn and with the talkativeness of a native to other natives had
unfolded his whole mission to the black servants of the two Swedes.
These had not been long in retailing the matter to their masters, and
the result was that when the runner left their camp to continue his
journey he had scarce passed from sight before there came the report of
a rifle and he rolled lifeless into the underbrush with a bullet in his
back.

A few moments later Malbihn strolled back into the encampment, where he
went to some pains to let it be known that he had had a shot at a fine
buck and missed.  The Swedes knew that their men hated them, and that
an overt act against Kovudoo would quickly be carried to the chief at
the first opportunity.  Nor were they sufficiently strong in either
guns or loyal followers to risk antagonizing the wily old chief.

Following this episode came the encounter with the baboons and the
strange, white savage who had allied himself with the beasts against
the humans.  Only by dint of masterful maneuvering and the expenditure
of much power had the Swedes been able to repulse the infuriated apes,
and even for hours afterward their camp was constantly besieged by
hundreds of snarling, screaming devils.

The Swedes, rifles in hand, repelled numerous savage charges which
lacked only efficient leadership to have rendered them as effective in
results as they were terrifying in appearance.  Time and time again the
two men thought they saw the smooth-skinned body of the wild ape-man
moving among the baboons in the forest, and the belief that he might
head a charge upon them proved most disquieting.  They would have given
much for a clean shot at him, for to him they attributed the loss of
their specimen and the ugly attitude of the baboons toward them.

"The fellow must be the same we fired on several years ago," said
Malbihn.  "That time he was accompanied by a gorilla.  Did you get a
good look at him, Carl?"

"Yes," replied Jenssen.  "He was not five paces from me when I fired at
him.  He appears to be an intelligent looking European--and not much
more than a lad.  There is nothing of the imbecile or degenerate in his
features or expression, as is usually true in similar cases, where some
lunatic escapes into the woods and by living in filth and nakedness
wins the title of wild man among the peasants of the neighborhood.  No,
this fellow is of different stuff--and so infinitely more to be feared.
As much as I should like a shot at him I hope he stays away.  Should he
ever deliberately lead a charge against us I wouldn't give much for our
chances if we happened to fail to bag him at the first rush."

But the white giant did not appear again to lead the baboons against
them, and finally the angry brutes themselves wandered off into the
jungle leaving the frightened safari in peace.

The next day the Swedes set out for Kovudoo's village bent on securing
possession of the person of the white girl whom Kovudoo's runner had
told them lay captive in the chief's village.  How they were to
accomplish their end they did not know.  Force was out of the question,
though they would not have hesitated to use it had they possessed it.
In former years they had marched rough shod over enormous areas, taking
toll by brute force even when kindliness or diplomacy would have
accomplished more; but now they were in bad straits--so bad that they
had shown their true colors scarce twice in a year and then only when
they came upon an isolated village, weak in numbers and poor in courage.

Kovudoo was not as these, and though his village was in a way remote
from the more populous district to the north his power was such that he
maintained an acknowledged suzerainty over the thin thread of villages
which connected him with the savage lords to the north.  To have
antagonized him would have spelled ruin for the Swedes.  It would have
meant that they might never reach civilization by the northern route.
To the west, the village of The Sheik lay directly in their path,
barring them effectually.  To the east the trail was unknown to them,
and to the south there was no trail.  So the two Swedes approached the
village of Kovudoo with friendly words upon their tongues and deep
craft in their hearts.

Their plans were well made.  There was no mention of the white
prisoner--they chose to pretend that they were not aware that Kovudoo
had a white prisoner.  They exchanged gifts with the old chief,
haggling with his plenipotentiaries over the value of what they were to
receive for what they gave, as is customary and proper when one has no
ulterior motives.  Unwarranted generosity would have aroused suspicion.

During the palaver which followed they retailed the gossip of the
villages through which they had passed, receiving in exchange such news
as Kovudoo possessed.  The palaver was long and tiresome, as these
native ceremonies always are to Europeans.  Kovudoo made no mention of
his prisoner and from his generous offers of guides and presents seemed
anxious to assure himself of the speedy departure of his guests.  It
was Malbihn who, quite casually, near the close of their talk,
mentioned the fact that The Sheik was dead.  Kovudoo evinced interest
and surprise.

"You did not know it?" asked Malbihn.  "That is strange.  It was during
the last moon.  He fell from his horse when the beast stepped in a
hole.  The horse fell upon him.  When his men came up The Sheik was
quite dead."

Kovudoo scratched his head.  He was much disappointed.  No Sheik meant
no ransom for the white girl.  Now she was worthless, unless he
utilized her for a feast or--a mate.  The latter thought aroused him.
He spat at a small beetle crawling through the dust before him.  He
eyed Malbihn appraisingly.  These white men were peculiar.  They
traveled far from their own villages without women.  Yet he knew they
cared for women.  But how much did they care for them?--that was the
question that disturbed Kovudoo.

"I know where there is a white girl," he said, unexpectedly.  "If you
wish to buy her she may be had cheap."

Malbihn shrugged.  "We have troubles enough, Kovudoo," he said,
"without burdening ourselves with an old she-hyena, and as for paying
for one--"  Malbihn snapped his fingers in derision.

"She is young," said Kovudoo, "and good looking."

The Swedes laughed.  "There are no good looking white women in the
jungle, Kovudoo," said Jenssen.  "You should be ashamed to try to make
fun of old friends."

Kovudoo sprang to his feet.  "Come," he said, "I will show you that she
is all I say."

Malbihn and Jenssen rose to follow him and as they did so their eyes
met, and Malbihn slowly drooped one of his lids in a sly wink.
Together they followed Kovudoo toward his hut.  In the dim interior
they discerned the figure of a woman lying bound upon a sleeping mat.

Malbihn took a single glance and turned away.  "She must be a thousand
years old, Kovudoo," he said, as he left the hut.

"She is young," cried the savage.  "It is dark in here.  You cannot
see.  Wait, I will have her brought out into the sunlight," and he
commanded the two warriors who watched the girl to cut the bonds from
her ankles and lead her forth for inspection.

Malbihn and Jenssen evinced no eagerness, though both were fairly
bursting with it--not to see the girl but to obtain possession of her.
They cared not if she had the face of a marmoset, or the figure of
pot-bellied Kovudoo himself.  All that they wished to know was that she
was the girl who had been stolen from The Sheik several years before.
They thought that they would recognize her for such if she was indeed
the same, but even so the testimony of the runner Kovudoo had sent to
The Sheik was such as to assure them that the girl was the one they had
once before attempted to abduct.

As Meriem was brought forth from the darkness of the hut's interior the
two men turned with every appearance of disinterestedness to glance at
her.  It was with difficulty that Malbihn suppressed an ejaculation of
astonishment.  The girl's beauty fairly took his breath from him; but
instantly he recovered his poise and turned to Kovudoo.

"Well?" he said to the old chief.

"Is she not both young and good looking?" asked Kovudoo.

"She is not old," replied Malbihn; "but even so she will be a burden.
We did not come from the north after wives--there are more than enough
there for us."

Meriem stood looking straight at the white men.  She expected nothing
from them--they were to her as much enemies as the black men.  She
hated and feared them all.  Malbihn spoke to her in Arabic.

"We are friends," he said.  "Would you like to have us take you away
from here?"

Slowly and dimly as though from a great distance recollection of the
once familiar tongue returned to her.

"I should like to go free," she said, "and go back to Korak."

"You would like to go with us?" persisted Malbihn.

"No," said Meriem.

Malbihn turned to Kovudoo.  "She does not wish to go with us," he said.

"You are men," returned the black.  "Can you not take her by force?"

"It would only add to our troubles," replied the Swede.  "No, Kovudoo,
we do not wish her; though, if you wish to be rid of her, we will take
her away because of our friendship for you."

Now Kovudoo knew that he had made a sale.  They wanted her.  So he
commenced to bargain, and in the end the person of Meriem passed from
the possession of the black chieftain into that of the two Swedes in
consideration of six yards of Amerikan, three empty brass cartridge
shells and a shiny, new jack knife from New Jersey.  And all but Meriem
were more than pleased with the bargain.

Kovudoo stipulated but a single condition and that was that the
Europeans were to leave his village and take the girl with them as
early the next morning as they could get started.  After the sale was
consummated he did not hesitate to explain his reasons for this demand.
He told them of the strenuous attempt of the girl's savage mate to
rescue her, and suggested that the sooner they got her out of the
country the more likely they were to retain possession of her.

Meriem was again bound and placed under guard, but this time in the
tent of the Swedes.  Malbihn talked to her, trying to persuade her to
accompany them willingly.  He told her that they would return her to
her own village; but when he discovered that she would rather die than
go back to the old sheik, he assured her that they would not take her
there, nor, as a matter of fact, had they had an intention of so doing.
As he talked with the girl the Swede feasted his eyes upon the
beautiful lines of her face and figure.  She had grown tall and
straight and slender toward maturity since he had seen her in The
Sheik's village on that long gone day.  For years she had represented
to him a certain fabulous reward.  In his thoughts she had been but the
personification of the pleasures and luxuries that many francs would
purchase.  Now as she stood before him pulsing with life and loveliness
she suggested other seductive and alluring possibilities.  He came
closer to her and laid his hand upon her.  The girl shrank from him.
He seized her and she struck him heavily in the mouth as he sought to
kiss her.  Then Jenssen entered the tent.

"Malbihn!" he almost shouted.  "You fool!"

Sven Malbihn released his hold upon the girl and turned toward his
companion.  His face was red with mortification.

"What the devil are you trying to do?" growled Jenssen.  "Would you
throw away every chance for the reward?  If we maltreat her we not only
couldn't collect a sou, but they'd send us to prison for our pains.  I
thought you had more sense, Malbihn."

"I'm not a wooden man," growled Malbihn.

"You'd better be," rejoined Jenssen, "at least until we have delivered
her over in safety and collected what will be coming to us."

"Oh, hell," cried Malbihn.  "What's the use?  They'll be glad enough to
have her back, and by the time we get there with her she'll be only too
glad to keep her mouth shut.  Why not?"

"Because I say not," growled Jenssen.  "I've always let you boss
things, Sven; but here's a case where what I say has got to go--because
I'm right and you're wrong, and we both know it."

"You're getting damned virtuous all of a sudden," growled Malbihn.
"Perhaps you think I have forgotten about the inn keeper's daughter,
and little Celella, and that nigger at--"

"Shut up!" snapped Jenssen.  "It's not a matter of virtue and you are
as well aware of that as I.  I don't want to quarrel with you, but so
help me God, Sven, you're not going to harm this girl if I have to kill
you to prevent it.  I've suffered and slaved and been nearly killed
forty times in the last nine or ten years trying to accomplish what
luck has thrown at our feet at last, and now I'm not going to be robbed
of the fruits of success because you happen to be more of a beast than
a man.  Again I warn you, Sven--" and he tapped the revolver that swung
in its holster at his hip.

Malbihn gave his friend an ugly look, shrugged his shoulders, and left
the tent.  Jenssen turned to Meriem.

"If he bothers you again, call me," he said.  "I shall always be near."

The girl had not understood the conversation that had been carried on
by her two owners, for it had been in Swedish; but what Jenssen had
just said to her in Arabic she understood and from it grasped an
excellent idea of what had passed between the two.  The expressions
upon their faces, their gestures, and Jenssen's final tapping of his
revolver before Malbihn had left the tent had all been eloquent of the
seriousness of their altercation.  Now, toward Jenssen she looked for
friendship, and with the innocence of youth she threw herself upon his
mercy, begging him to set her free, that she might return to Korak and
her jungle life; but she was doomed to another disappointment, for the
man only laughed at her roughly and told her that if she tried to
escape she would be punished by the very thing that he had just saved
her from.

All that night she lay listening for a signal from Korak.  All about
the jungle life moved through the darkness.  To her sensitive ears came
sounds that the others in the camp could not hear--sounds that she
interpreted as we might interpret the speech of a friend, but not once
came a single note that reflected the presence of Korak.  But she knew
that he would come.  Nothing short of death itself could prevent her
Korak from returning for her.  What delayed him though?

When morning came again and the night had brought no succoring Korak,
Meriem's faith and loyalty were still unshaken though misgivings began
to assail her as to the safety of her friend.  It seemed unbelievable
that serious mishap could have overtaken her wonderful Korak who daily
passed unscathed through all the terrors of the jungle.  Yet morning
came, the morning meal was eaten, the camp broken and the disreputable
safari of the Swedes was on the move northward with still no sign of
the rescue the girl momentarily expected.

All that day they marched, and the next and the next, nor did Korak
even so much as show himself to the patient little waiter moving,
silently and stately, beside her hard captors.

Malbihn remained scowling and angry.  He replied to Jenssen's friendly
advances in curt monosyllables.  To Meriem he did not speak, but on
several occasions she discovered him glaring at her from beneath half
closed lids--greedily.  The look sent a shudder through her.  She
hugged Geeka closer to her breast and doubly regretted the knife that
they had taken from her when she was captured by Kovudoo.

It was on the fourth day that Meriem began definitely to give up hope.
Something had happened to Korak.  She knew it.  He would never come
now, and these men would take her far away.  Presently they would kill
her.  She would never see her Korak again.

On this day the Swedes rested, for they had marched rapidly and their
men were tired.  Malbihn and Jenssen had gone from camp to hunt, taking
different directions.  They had been gone about an hour when the door
of Meriem's tent was lifted and Malbihn entered.  The look of a beast
was on his face.




Chapter 14


With wide eyes fixed upon him, like a trapped creature horrified
beneath the mesmeric gaze of a great serpent, the girl watched the
approach of the man.  Her hands were free, the Swedes having secured
her with a length of ancient slave chain fastened at one end to an iron
collar padlocked about her neck and at the other to a long stake driven
deep into the ground.

Slowly Meriem shrank inch by inch toward the opposite end of the tent.
Malbihn followed her.  His hands were extended and his fingers
half-opened--claw-like--to seize her.  His lips were parted, and his
breath came quickly, pantingly.

The girl recalled Jenssen's instructions to call him should Malbihn
molest her; but Jenssen had gone into the jungle to hunt.  Malbihn had
chosen his time well.  Yet she screamed, loud and shrill, once, twice,
a third time, before Malbihn could leap across the tent and throttle
her alarming cries with his brute fingers.  Then she fought him, as any
jungle she might fight, with tooth and nail.  The man found her no easy
prey.  In that slender, young body, beneath the rounded curves and the
fine, soft skin, lay the muscles of a young lioness.  But Malbihn was
no weakling.  His character and appearance were brutal, nor did they
belie his brawn.  He was of giant stature and of giant strength.
Slowly he forced the girl back upon the ground, striking her in the
face when she hurt him badly either with teeth or nails.  Meriem struck
back, but she was growing weaker from the choking fingers at her throat.

Out in the jungle Jenssen had brought down two bucks.  His hunting had
not carried him far afield, nor was he prone to permit it to do so.  He
was suspicious of Malbihn.  The very fact that his companion had
refused to accompany him and elected instead to hunt alone in another
direction would not, under ordinary circumstances, have seemed fraught
with sinister suggestion; but Jenssen knew Malbihn well, and so, having
secured meat, he turned immediately back toward camp, while his boys
brought in his kill.

He had covered about half the return journey when a scream came faintly
to his ears from the direction of camp.  He halted to listen.  It was
repeated twice.  Then silence.  With a muttered curse Jenssen broke
into a rapid run.  He wondered if he would be too late.  What a fool
Malbihn was indeed to thus chance jeopardizing a fortune!

Further away from camp than Jenssen and upon the opposite side another
heard Meriem's screams--a stranger who was not even aware of the
proximity of white men other than himself--a hunter with a handful of
sleek, black warriors.  He, too, listened intently for a moment.  That
the voice was that of a woman in distress he could not doubt, and so he
also hastened at a run in the direction of the affrighted voice; but he
was much further away than Jenssen so that the latter reached the tent
first.  What the Swede found there roused no pity within his calloused
heart, only anger against his fellow scoundrel.  Meriem was still
fighting off her attacker.  Malbihn still was showering blows upon her.
Jenssen, streaming foul curses upon his erstwhile friend, burst into
the tent.  Malbihn, interrupted, dropped his victim and turned to meet
Jenssen's infuriated charge.  He whipped a revolver from his hip.
Jenssen, anticipating the lightning move of the other's hand, drew
almost simultaneously, and both men fired at once.  Jenssen was still
moving toward Malbihn at the time, but at the flash of the explosion he
stopped.  His revolver dropped from nerveless fingers.  For a moment he
staggered drunkenly.  Deliberately Malbihn put two more bullets into
his friend's body at close range.  Even in the midst of the excitement
and her terror Meriem found herself wondering at the tenacity of life
which the hit man displayed.  His eyes were closed, his head dropped
forward upon his breast, his hands hung limply before him.  Yet still
he stood there upon his feet, though he reeled horribly.  It was not
until the third bullet had found its mark within his body that he
lunged forward upon his face.  Then Malbihn approached him, and with an
oath kicked him viciously.  Then he returned once more to Meriem.
Again he seized her, and at the same instant the flaps of the tent
opened silently and a tall white man stood in the aperture.  Neither
Meriem or Malbihn saw the newcomer.  The latter's back was toward him
while his body hid the stranger from Meriem's eyes.

He crossed the tent quickly, stepping over Jenssen's body.  The first
intimation Malbihn had that he was not to carry out his design without
further interruption was a heavy hand upon his shoulder.  He wheeled to
face an utter stranger--a tall, black-haired, gray-eyed stranger clad
in khaki and pith helmet.  Malbihn reached for his gun again, but
another hand had been quicker than his and he saw the weapon tossed to
the ground at the side of the tent--out of reach.

"What is the meaning of this?" the stranger addressed his question to
Meriem in a tongue she did not understand.  She shook her head and
spoke in Arabic.  Instantly the man changed his question to that
language.

"These men are taking me away from Korak," explained the girl.  "This
one would have harmed me.  The other, whom he had just killed, tried to
stop him.  They were both very bad men; but this one is the worse.  If
my Korak were here he would kill him.  I suppose you are like them, so
you will not kill him."

The stranger smiled.  "He deserves killing," he said.  "There is no
doubt of that.  Once I should have killed him; but not now.  I will
see, though, that he does not bother you any more."

He was holding Malbihn in a grasp the giant Swede could not break,
though he struggled to do so, and he was holding him as easily as
Malbihn might have held a little child, yet Malbihn was a huge man,
mightily thewed.  The Swede began to rage and curse.  He struck at his
captor, only to be twisted about and held at arm's length.  Then he
shouted to his boys to come and kill the stranger.  In response a dozen
strange blacks entered the tent.  They, too, were powerful,
clean-limbed men, not at all like the mangy crew that followed the
Swedes.

"We have had enough foolishness," said the stranger to Malbihn.  "You
deserve death, but I am not the law.  I know now who you are.  I have
heard of you before.  You and your friend here bear a most unsavory
reputation.  We do not want you in our country.  I shall let you go
this time; but should you ever return I shall take the law into my own
hands.  You understand?"

Malbihn blustered and threatened, finishing by applying a most
uncomplimentary name to his captor.  For this he received a shaking
that rattled his teeth.  Those who know say that the most painful
punishment that can be inflicted upon an adult male, short of injuring
him, is a good, old fashioned shaking.  Malbihn received such a shaking.

"Now get out," said the stranger, "and next time you see me remember
who I am," and he spoke a name in the Swede's ear--a name that more
effectually subdued the scoundrel than many beatings--then he gave him
a push that carried him bodily through the tent doorway to sprawl upon
the turf beyond.

"Now," he said, turning toward Meriem, "who has the key to this thing
about your neck?"

The girl pointed to Jenssen's body.  "He carried it always," she said.

The stranger searched the clothing on the corpse until he came upon the
key.  A moment more Meriem was free.

"Will you let me go back to my Korak?" she asked.

"I will see that you are returned to your people," he replied.  "Who
are they and where is their village?"

He had been eyeing her strange, barbaric garmenture wonderingly.  From
her speech she was evidently an Arab girl; but he had never before seen
one thus clothed.

"Who are your people?  Who is Korak?" he asked again.

"Korak!  Why Korak is an ape.  I have no other people.  Korak and I
live in the jungle alone since A'ht went to be king of the apes." She
had always thus pronounced Akut's name, for so it had sounded to her
when first she came with Korak and the ape.  "Korak could have been
kind, but he would not."

A questioning expression entered the stranger's eyes.  He looked at the
girl closely.

"So Korak is an ape?" he said.  "And what, pray, are you?"

"I am Meriem.  I, also, am an ape."

"M-m," was the stranger's only oral comment upon this startling
announcement; but what he thought might have been partially interpreted
through the pitying light that entered his eyes.  He approached the
girl and started to lay his hand upon her forehead.  She drew back with
a savage little growl.  A smile touched his lips.

"You need not fear me," he said.  "I shall not harm you.  I only wish
to discover if you have fever--if you are entirely well.  If you are we
will set forth in search of Korak."

Meriem looked straight into the keen gray eyes.  She must have found
there an unquestionable assurance of the honorableness of their owner,
for she permitted him to lay his palm upon her forehead and feel her
pulse.  Apparently she had no fever.

"How long have you been an ape?" asked the man.

"Since I was a little girl, many, many years ago, and Korak came and
took me from my father who was beating me.  Since then I have lived in
the trees with Korak and A'ht."

"Where in the jungle lives Korak?" asked the stranger.

Meriem pointed with a sweep of her hand that took in, generously, half
the continent of Africa.

"Could you find your way back to him?"

"I do not know," she replied; "but he will find his way to me."

"Then I have a plan," said the stranger.  "I live but a few marches
from here.  I shall take you home where my wife will look after you and
care for you until we can find Korak or Korak finds us.  If he could
find you here he can find you at my village.  Is it not so?"

Meriem thought that it was so; but she did not like the idea of not
starting immediately back to meet Korak.  On the other hand the man had
no intention of permitting this poor, insane child to wander further
amidst the dangers of the jungle.  From whence she had come, or what
she had undergone he could not guess, but that her Korak and their life
among the apes was but a figment of a disordered mind he could not
doubt.  He knew the jungle well, and he knew that men have lived alone
and naked among the savage beasts for years; but a frail and slender
girl!  No, it was not possible.

Together they went outside.  Malbihn's boys were striking camp in
preparation for a hasty departure.  The stranger's blacks were
conversing with them.  Malbihn stood at a distance, angry and
glowering.  The stranger approached one of his own men.

"Find out where they got this girl," he commanded.

The Negro thus addressed questioned one of Malbihn's followers.
Presently he returned to his master.

"They bought her from old Kovudoo," he said.  "That is all that this
fellow will tell me.  He pretends that he knows nothing more, and I
guess that he does not.  These two white men were very bad men.  They
did many things that their boys knew not the meanings of.  It would be
well, Bwana, to kill the other."

"I wish that I might; but a new law is come into this part of the
jungle.  It is not as it was in the old days, Muviri," replied the
master.

The stranger remained until Malbihn and his safari had disappeared into
the jungle toward the north.  Meriem, trustful now, stood at his side,
Geeka clutched in one slim, brown hand.  They talked together, the man
wondering at the faltering Arabic of the girl, but attributing it
finally to her defective mentality.  Could he have known that years had
elapsed since she had used it until she was taken by the Swedes he
would not have wondered that she had half forgotten it.  There was yet
another reason why the language of The Sheik had thus readily eluded
her; but of that reason she herself could not have guessed the truth
any better than could the man.

He tried to persuade her to return with him to his "village" as he
called it, or douar, in Arabic; but she was insistent upon searching
immediately for Korak.  As a last resort he determined to take her with
him by force rather than sacrifice her life to the insane hallucination
which haunted her; but, being a wise man, he determined to humor her
first and then attempt to lead her as he would have her go.  So when
they took up their march it was in the direction of the south, though
his own ranch lay almost due east.

By degrees he turned the direction of their way more and more eastward,
and greatly was he pleased to note that the girl failed to discover
that any change was being made.  Little by little she became more
trusting.  At first she had had but her intuition to guide her belief
that this big Tarmangani meant her no harm, but as the days passed and
she saw that his kindness and consideration never faltered she came to
compare him with Korak, and to be very fond of him; but never did her
loyalty to her apeman flag.

On the fifth day they came suddenly upon a great plain and from the
edge of the forest the girl saw in the distance fenced fields and many
buildings.  At the sight she drew back in astonishment.

"Where are we?" she asked, pointing.

"We could not find Korak," replied the man, "and as our way led near my
douar I have brought you here to wait and rest with my wife until my
men can find your ape, or he finds you.  It is better thus, little one.
You will be safer with us, and you will be happier."

"I am afraid, Bwana," said the girl.  "In thy douar they will beat me
as did The Sheik, my father.  Let me go back into the jungle.  There
Korak will find me.  He would not think to look for me in the douar of
a white man."

"No one will beat you, child," replied the man.  "I have not done so,
have I?  Well, here all belong to me.  They will treat you well.  Here
no one is beaten.  My wife will be very good to you, and at last Korak
will come, for I shall send men to search for him."

The girl shook her head.  "They could not bring him, for he would kill
them, as all men have tried to kill him.  I am afraid.  Let me go,
Bwana."

"You do not know the way to your own country.  You would be lost.  The
leopards or the lions would get you the first night, and after all you
would not find your Korak.  It is better that you stay with us.  Did I
not save you from the bad man?  Do you not owe me something for that?
Well, then remain with us for a few weeks at least until we can
determine what is best for you.  You are only a little girl--it would
be wicked to permit you to go alone into the jungle."

Meriem laughed.  "The jungle," she said, "is my father and my mother.
It has been kinder to me than have men.  I am not afraid of the jungle.
Nor am I afraid of the leopard or the lion.  When my time comes I shall
die.  It may be that a leopard or a lion shall kill me, or it may be a
tiny bug no bigger than the end of my littlest finger.  When the lion
leaps upon me, or the little bug stings me I shall be afraid--oh, then
I shall be terribly afraid, I know; but life would be very miserable
indeed were I to spend it in terror of the thing that has not yet
happened.  If it be the lion my terror shall be short of life; but if
it be the little bug I may suffer for days before I die.  And so I fear
the lion least of all.  He is great and noisy.  I can hear him, or see
him, or smell him in time to escape; but any moment I may place a hand
or foot on the little bug, and never know that he is there until I feel
his deadly sting.  No, I do not fear the jungle.  I love it.  I should
rather die than leave it forever; but your douar is close beside the
jungle.  You have been good to me.  I will do as you wish, and remain
here for a while to wait the coming of my Korak."

"Good!" said the man, and he led the way down toward the flower-covered
bungalow behind which lay the barns and out-houses of a well-ordered
African farm.

As they came nearer a dozen dogs ran barking toward them--gaunt wolf
hounds, a huge great Dane, a nimble-footed collie and a number of
yapping, quarrelsome fox terriers.  At first their appearance was
savage and unfriendly in the extreme; but once they recognized the
foremost black warriors, and the white man behind them their attitude
underwent a remarkable change.  The collie and the fox terriers became
frantic with delirious joy, and while the wolf hounds and the great
Dane were not a whit less delighted at the return of their master their
greetings were of a more dignified nature.  Each in turn sniffed at
Meriem who displayed not the slightest fear of any of them.

The wolf hounds bristled and growled at the scent of wild beasts that
clung to her garment; but when she laid her hand upon their heads and
her soft voice murmured caressingly they half-closed their eyes,
lifting their upper lips in contented canine smiles.  The man was
watching them and he too smiled, for it was seldom that these savage
brutes took thus kindly to strangers.  It was as though in some subtile
way the girl had breathed a message of kindred savagery to their savage
hearts.

With her slim fingers grasping the collar of a wolf hound upon either
side of her Meriem walked on toward the bungalow upon the porch of
which a woman dressed in white waved a welcome to her returning lord.
There was more fear in the girl's eyes now than there had been in the
presence of strange men or savage beasts.  She hesitated, turning an
appealing glance toward the man.

"This is my wife," he said.  "She will be glad to welcome you."

The woman came down the path to meet them.  The man kissed her, and
turning toward Meriem introduced them, speaking in the Arab tongue the
girl understood.

"This is Meriem, my dear," he said, and he told the story of the jungle
waif in so far as he knew it.

Meriem saw that the woman was beautiful.  She saw that sweetness and
goodness were stamped indelibly upon her countenance.  She no longer
feared her, and when her brief story had been narrated and the woman
came and put her arms about her and kissed her and called her "poor
little darling" something snapped in Meriem's little heart.  She buried
her face on the bosom of this new friend in whose voice was the mother
tone that Meriem had not heard for so many years that she had forgotten
its very existence.  She buried her face on the kindly bosom and wept
as she had not wept before in all her life--tears of relief and joy
that she could not fathom.

And so came Meriem, the savage little Mangani, out of her beloved
jungle into the midst of a home of culture and refinement.  Already
"Bwana" and "My Dear," as she first heard them called and continued to
call them, were as father and mother to her.  Once her savage fears
allayed, she went to the opposite extreme of trustfulness and love.
Now she was willing to wait here until they found Korak, or Korak found
her.  She did not give up that thought--Korak, her Korak always was
first.




Chapter 15


And out in the jungle, far away, Korak, covered with wounds, stiff with
clotted blood, burning with rage and sorrow, swung back upon the trail
of the great baboons.  He had not found them where he had last seen
them, nor in any of their usual haunts; but he sought them along the
well-marked spoor they had left behind them, and at last he overtook
them.  When first he came upon them they were moving slowly but
steadily southward in one of those periodic migrations the reasons for
which the baboon himself is best able to explain.  At sight of the
white warrior who came upon them from down wind the herd halted in
response to the warning cry of the sentinel that had discovered him.
There was much growling and muttering; much stiff-legged circling on
the part of the bulls.  The mothers, in nervous, high pitched tones,
called their young to their sides, and with them moved to safety behind
their lords and masters.

Korak called aloud to the king, who, at the familiar voice, advanced
slowly, warily, and still stiff-legged.  He must have the confirmatory
evidence of his nose before venturing to rely too implicitly upon the
testimony of his ears and eyes.  Korak stood perfectly still.  To have
advanced then might have precipitated an immediate attack, or, as
easily, a panic of flight.  Wild beasts are creatures of nerves.  It is
a relatively simple thing to throw them into a species of hysteria
which may induce either a mania for murder, or symptoms of apparent
abject cowardice--it is a question, however, if a wild animal ever is
actually a coward.

The king baboon approached Korak.  He walked around him in an ever
decreasing circle--growling, grunting, sniffing.  Korak spoke to him.

"I am Korak," he said.  "I opened the cage that held you.  I saved you
from the Tarmangani.  I am Korak, The Killer.  I am your friend."

"Huh," grunted the king.  "Yes, you are Korak.  My ears told me that
you were Korak.  My eyes told me that you were Korak.  Now my nose
tells me that you are Korak.  My nose is never wrong.  I am your
friend.  Come, we shall hunt together."

"Korak cannot hunt now," replied the ape-man.  "The Gomangani have
stolen Meriem.  They have tied her in their village.  They will not let
her go.  Korak, alone, was unable to set her free.  Korak set you free.
Now will you bring your people and set Korak's Meriem free?"

"The Gomangani have many sharp sticks which they throw.  They pierce
the bodies of my people.  They kill us.  The gomangani are bad people.
They will kill us all if we enter their village."

"The Tarmangani have sticks that make a loud noise and kill at a great
distance," replied Korak.  "They had these when Korak set you free from
their trap.  If Korak had run away from them you would now be a
prisoner among the Tarmangani."

The baboon scratched his head.  In a rough circle about him and the
ape-man squatted the bulls of his herd.  They blinked their eyes,
shouldered one another about for more advantageous positions, scratched
in the rotting vegetation upon the chance of unearthing a toothsome
worm, or sat listlessly eyeing their king and the strange Mangani, who
called himself thus but who more closely resembled the hated
Tarmangani.  The king looked at some of the older of his subjects, as
though inviting suggestion.

"We are too few," grunted one.

"There are the baboons of the hill country," suggested another.  "They
are as many as the leaves of the forest.  They, too, hate the
Gomangani.  They love to fight.  They are very savage.  Let us ask them
to accompany us.  Then can we kill all the Gomangani in the jungle." He
rose and growled horribly, bristling his stiff hair.

"That is the way to talk," cried The Killer, "but we do not need the
baboons of the hill country.  We are enough.  It will take a long time
to fetch them.  Meriem may be dead and eaten before we could free her.
Let us set out at once for the village of the Gomangani.  If we travel
very fast it will not take long to reach it.  Then, all at the same
time, we can charge into the village, growling and barking.  The
Gomangani will be very frightened and will run away.  While they are
gone we can seize Meriem and carry her off.  We do not have to kill or
be killed--all that Korak wishes is his Meriem."

"We are too few," croaked the old ape again.

"Yes, we are too few," echoed others.

Korak could not persuade them.  They would help him, gladly; but they
must do it in their own way and that meant enlisting the services of
their kinsmen and allies of the hill country.  So Korak was forced to
give in.  All he could do for the present was to urge them to haste,
and at his suggestion the king baboon with a dozen of his mightiest
bulls agreed to go to the hill country with Korak, leaving the balance
of the herd behind.

Once enlisted in the adventure the baboons became quite enthusiastic
about it.  The delegation set off immediately.  They traveled swiftly;
but the ape-man found no difficulty in keeping up with them.  They made
a tremendous racket as they passed through the trees in an endeavor to
suggest to enemies in their front that a great herd was approaching,
for when the baboons travel in large numbers there is no jungle
creature who cares to molest them.  When the nature of the country
required much travel upon the level, and the distance between trees was
great, they moved silently, knowing that the lion and the leopard would
not be fooled by noise when they could see plainly for themselves that
only a handful of baboons were on the trail.

For two days the party raced through the savage country, passing out of
the dense jungle into an open plain, and across this to timbered
mountain slopes.  Here Korak never before had been.  It was a new
country to him and the change from the monotony of the circumscribed
view in the jungle was pleasing.  But he had little desire to enjoy the
beauties of nature at this time.  Meriem, his Meriem was in danger.
Until she was freed and returned to him he had little thought for aught
else.

Once in the forest that clothed the mountain slopes the baboons
advanced more slowly.  Constantly they gave tongue to a plaintive note
of calling.  Then would follow silence while they listened.  At last,
faintly from the distance straight ahead came an answer.

The baboons continued to travel in the direction of the voices that
floated through the forest to them in the intervals of their own
silence.  Thus, calling and listening, they came closer to their
kinsmen, who, it was evident to Korak, were coming to meet them in
great numbers; but when, at last, the baboons of the hill country came
in view the ape-man was staggered at the reality that broke upon his
vision.

What appeared a solid wall of huge baboons rose from the ground through
the branches of the trees to the loftiest terrace to which they dared
entrust their weight.  Slowly they were approaching, voicing their
weird, plaintive call, and behind them, as far as Korak's eyes could
pierce the verdure, rose solid walls of their fellows treading close
upon their heels.  There were thousands of them.  The ape-man could not
but think of the fate of his little party should some untoward incident
arouse even momentarily the rage of fear of a single one of all these
thousands.

But nothing such befell.  The two kings approached one another, as was
their custom, with much sniffing and bristling.  They satisfied
themselves of each other's identity.  Then each scratched the other's
back.  After a moment they spoke together.  Korak's friend explained
the nature of their visit, and for the first time Korak showed himself.
He had been hiding behind a bush.  The excitement among the hill
baboons was intense at sight of him.  For a moment Korak feared that he
should be torn to pieces; but his fear was for Meriem.  Should he die
there would be none to succor her.

The two kings, however, managed to quiet the multitude, and Korak was
permitted to approach.  Slowly the hill baboons came closer to him.
They sniffed at him from every angle.  When he spoke to them in their
own tongue they were filled with wonder and delight.  They talked to
him and listened while he spoke.  He told them of Meriem, and of their
life in the jungle where they were the friends of all the ape folk from
little Manu to Mangani, the great ape.

"The Gomangani, who are keeping Meriem from me, are no friends of
yours," he said.  "They kill you.  The baboons of the low country are
too few to go against them.  They tell me that you are very many and
very brave--that your numbers are as the numbers of the grasses upon
the plains or the leaves within the forest, and that even Tantor, the
elephant, fears you, so brave you are.  They told me that you would be
happy to accompany us to the village of the Gomangani and punish these
bad people while I, Korak, The Killer, carry away my Meriem."

The king ape puffed out his chest and strutted about very stiff-legged
indeed.  So also did many of the other great bulls of his nation.  They
were pleased and flattered by the words of the strange Tarmangani, who
called himself Mangani and spoke the language of the hairy progenitors
of man.

"Yes," said one, "we of the hill country are mighty fighters.  Tantor
fears us.  Numa fears us.  Sheeta fears us.  The Gomangani of the hill
country are glad to pass us by in peace.  I, for one, will come with
you to the village of the Gomangani of the low places.  I am the king's
first he-child.  Alone can I kill all the Gomangani of the low
country," and he swelled his chest and strutted proudly back and forth,
until the itching back of a comrade commanded his industrious attention.

"I am Goob," cried another.  "My fighting fangs are long.  They are
sharp.  They are strong.  Into the soft flesh of many a Gomangani have
they been buried.  Alone I slew the sister of Sheeta.  Goob will go to
the low country with you and kill so many of the Gomangani that there
will be none left to count the dead," and then he, too, strutted and
pranced before the admiring eyes of the shes and the young.

Korak looked at the king, questioningly.

"Your bulls are very brave," he said; "but braver than any is the king."

Thus addressed, the shaggy bull, still in his prime--else he had been
no longer king--growled ferociously.  The forest echoed to his lusty
challenges.  The little baboons clutched fearfully at their mothers'
hairy necks.  The bulls, electrified, leaped high in air and took up
the roaring challenge of their king.  The din was terrific.

Korak came close to the king and shouted in his ear, "Come." Then he
started off through the forest toward the plain that they must cross on
their long journey back to the village of Kovudoo, the Gomangani.  The
king, still roaring and shrieking, wheeled and followed him.  In their
wake came the handful of low country baboons and the thousands of the
hill clan--savage, wiry, dog-like creatures, athirst for blood.

And so they came, upon the second day, to the village of Kovudoo.  It
was mid-afternoon.  The village was sunk in the quiet of the great
equatorial sun-heat.  The mighty herd traveled quietly now.  Beneath
the thousands of padded feet the forest gave forth no greater sound
than might have been produced by the increased soughing of a stronger
breeze through the leafy branches of the trees.

Korak and the two kings were in the lead.  Close beside the village
they halted until the stragglers had closed up.  Now utter silence
reigned.  Korak, creeping stealthily, entered the tree that overhung
the palisade.  He glanced behind him.  The pack were close upon his
heels.  The time had come.  He had warned them continuously during the
long march that no harm must befall the white she who lay a prisoner
within the village.  All others were their legitimate prey.  Then,
raising his face toward the sky, he gave voice to a single cry.  It was
the signal.

In response three thousand hairy bulls leaped screaming and barking
into the village of the terrified blacks.  Warriors poured from every
hut.  Mothers gathered their babies in their arms and fled toward the
gates as they saw the horrid horde pouring into the village street.
Kovudoo marshaled his fighting men about him and, leaping and yelling
to arouse their courage, offered a bristling, spear tipped front to the
charging horde.

Korak, as he had led the march, led the charge.  The blacks were struck
with horror and dismay at the sight of this white-skinned youth at the
head of a pack of hideous baboons.  For an instant they held their
ground, hurling their spears once at the advancing multitude; but
before they could fit arrows to their bows they wavered, gave, and
turned in terrified rout.  Into their ranks, upon their backs, sinking
strong fangs into the muscles of their necks sprang the baboons and
first among them, most ferocious, most blood-thirsty, most terrible was
Korak, The Killer.

At the village gates, through which the blacks poured in panic, Korak
left them to the tender mercies of his allies and turned himself
eagerly toward the hut in which Meriem had been a prisoner.  It was
empty.  One after another the filthy interiors revealed the same
disheartening fact--Meriem was in none of them.  That she had not been
taken by the blacks in their flight from the village Korak knew for he
had watched carefully for a glimpse of her among the fugitives.

To the mind of the ape-man, knowing as he did the proclivities of the
savages, there was but a single explanation--Meriem had been killed and
eaten.  With the conviction that Meriem was dead there surged through
Korak's brain a wave of blood red rage against those he believed to be
her murderer.  In the distance he could hear the snarling of the
baboons mixed with the screams of their victims, and towards this he
made his way.  When he came upon them the baboons had commenced to tire
of the sport of battle, and the blacks in a little knot were making a
new stand, using their knob sticks effectively upon the few bulls who
still persisted in attacking them.

Among these broke Korak from the branches of a tree above them--swift,
relentless, terrible, he hurled himself upon the savage warriors of
Kovudoo.  Blind fury possessed him.  Too, it protected him by its very
ferocity.  Like a wounded lioness he was here, there, everywhere,
striking terrific blows with hard fists and with the precision and
timeliness of the trained fighter.  Again and again he buried his teeth
in the flesh of a foeman.  He was upon one and gone again to another
before an effective blow could be dealt him.  Yet, though great was the
weight of his execution in determining the result of the combat, it was
outweighed by the terror which he inspired in the simple, superstitious
minds of his foeman.  To them this white warrior, who consorted with
the great apes and the fierce baboons, who growled and snarled and
snapped like a beast, was not human.  He was a demon of the forest--a
fearsome god of evil whom they had offended, and who had come out of
his lair deep in the jungle to punish them.  And because of this belief
there were many who offered but little defense, feeling as they did the
futility of pitting their puny mortal strength against that of a deity.

Those who could fled, until at last there were no more to pay the
penalty for a deed, which, while not beyond them, they were,
nevertheless, not guilty of.  Panting and bloody, Korak paused for want
of further victims.  The baboons gathered about him, sated themselves
with blood and battle.  They lolled upon the ground, fagged.

In the distance Kovudoo was gathering his scattered tribesmen, and
taking account of injuries and losses.  His people were panic stricken.
Nothing could prevail upon them to remain longer in this country.  They
would not even return to the village for their belongings.  Instead
they insisted upon continuing their flight until they had put many
miles between themselves and the stamping ground of the demon who had
so bitterly attacked them.  And thus it befell that Korak drove from
their homes the only people who might have aided him in a search for
Meriem, and cut off the only connecting link between him and her from
whomsoever might come in search of him from the douar of the kindly
Bwana who had befriended his little jungle sweetheart.

It was a sour and savage Korak who bade farewell to his baboon allies
upon the following morning.  They wished him to accompany him; but the
ape-man had no heart for the society of any.  Jungle life had
encouraged taciturnity in him.  His sorrow had deepened this to a
sullen moroseness that could not brook even the savage companionship of
the ill-natured baboons.

Brooding and despondent he took his solitary way into the deepest
jungle.  He moved along the ground when he knew that Numa was abroad
and hungry.  He took to the same trees that harbored Sheeta, the
panther.  He courted death in a hundred ways and a hundred forms.  His
mind was ever occupied with reminiscences of Meriem and the happy years
that they had spent together.  He realized now to the full what she had
meant to him.  The sweet face, the tanned, supple, little body, the
bright smile that always had welcomed his return from the hunt haunted
him continually.

Inaction soon threatened him with madness.  He must be on the go.  He
must fill his days with labor and excitement that he might forget--that
night might find him so exhausted that he should sleep in blessed
unconsciousness of his misery until a new day had come.

Had he guessed that by any possibility Meriem might still live he would
at least have had hope.  His days could have been devoted to searching
for her; but he implicitly believed that she was dead.

For a long year he led his solitary, roaming life.  Occasionally he
fell in with Akut and his tribe, hunting with them for a day or two; or
he might travel to the hill country where the baboons had come to
accept him as a matter of course; but most of all was he with Tantor,
the elephant--the great gray battle ship of the jungle--the
super-dreadnaught of his savage world.

The peaceful quiet of the monster bulls, the watchful solicitude of the
mother cows, the awkward playfulness of the calves rested, interested,
and amused Korak.  The life of the huge beasts took his mind,
temporarily from his own grief.  He came to love them as he loved not
even the great apes, and there was one gigantic tusker in particular of
which he was very fond--the lord of the herd--a savage beast that was
wont to charge a stranger upon the slightest provocation, or upon no
provocation whatsoever.  And to Korak this mountain of destruction was
docile and affectionate as a lap dog.

He came when Korak called.  He wound his trunk about the ape-man's body
and lifted him to his broad neck in response to a gesture, and there
would Korak lie at full length kicking his toes affectionately into the
thick hide and brushing the flies from about the tender ears of his
colossal chum with a leafy branch torn from a nearby tree by Tantor for
the purpose.

And all the while Meriem was scarce a hundred miles away.




Chapter 16


To Meriem, in her new home, the days passed quickly.  At first she was
all anxiety to be off into the jungle searching for her Korak.  Bwana,
as she insisted upon calling her benefactor, dissuaded her from making
the attempt at once by dispatching a head man with a party of blacks to
Kovudoo's village with instructions to learn from the old savage how he
came into possession of the white girl and as much of her antecedents
as might be culled from the black chieftain.  Bwana particularly
charged his head man with the duty of questioning Kovudoo relative to
the strange character whom the girl called Korak, and of searching for
the ape-man if he found the slightest evidence upon which to ground a
belief in the existence of such an individual.  Bwana was more than
fully convinced that Korak was a creature of the girl's disordered
imagination.  He believed that the terrors and hardships she had
undergone during captivity among the blacks and her frightful
experience with the two Swedes had unbalanced her mind but as the days
passed and he became better acquainted with her and able to observe her
under the ordinary conditions of the quiet of his African home he was
forced to admit that her strange tale puzzled him not a little, for
there was no other evidence whatever that Meriem was not in full
possession of her normal faculties.

The white man's wife, whom Meriem had christened "My Dear" from having
first heard her thus addressed by Bwana, took not only a deep interest
in the little jungle waif because of her forlorn and friendless state,
but grew to love her as well for her sunny disposition and natural
charm of temperament.  And Meriem, similarly impressed by little
attributes in the gentle, cultured woman, reciprocated the other's
regard and affection.

And so the days flew by while Meriem waited the return of the head man
and his party from the country of Kovudoo.  They were short days, for
into them were crowded many hours of insidious instruction of the
unlettered child by the lonely woman.  She commenced at once to teach
the girl English without forcing it upon her as a task.  She varied the
instruction with lessons in sewing and deportment, nor once did she let
Meriem guess that it was not all play.  Nor was this difficult, since
the girl was avid to learn.  Then there were pretty dresses to be made
to take the place of the single leopard skin and in this she found the
child as responsive and enthusiastic as any civilized miss of her
acquaintance.

A month passed before the head man returned--a month that had
transformed the savage, half-naked little tarmangani into a daintily
frocked girl of at least outward civilization.  Meriem had progressed
rapidly with the intricacies of the English language, for Bwana and My
Dear had persistently refused to speak Arabic from the time they had
decided that Meriem must learn English, which had been a day or two
after her introduction into their home.

The report of the head man plunged Meriem into a period of despondency,
for he had found the village of Kovudoo deserted nor, search as he
would, could he discover a single native anywhere in the vicinity.  For
some time he had camped near the village, spending the days in a
systematic search of the environs for traces of Meriem's Korak; but in
this quest, too, had he failed.  He had seen neither apes nor ape-man.
Meriem at first insisted upon setting forth herself in search of Korak,
but Bwana prevailed upon her to wait.  He would go himself, he assured
her, as soon as he could find the time, and at last Meriem consented to
abide by his wishes; but it was months before she ceased to mourn
almost hourly for her Korak.

My Dear grieved with the grieving girl and did her best to comfort and
cheer her.  She told her that if Korak lived he would find her; but all
the time she believed that Korak had never existed beyond the child's
dreams.  She planned amusements to distract Meriem's attention from her
sorrow, and she instituted a well-designed campaign to impress upon the
child the desirability of civilized life and customs.  Nor was this
difficult, as she was soon to learn, for it rapidly became evident that
beneath the uncouth savagery of the girl was a bed rock of innate
refinement--a nicety of taste and predilection that quite equaled that
of her instructor.

My Dear was delighted.  She was lonely and childless, and so she
lavished upon this little stranger all the mother love that would have
gone to her own had she had one.  The result was that by the end of the
first year none might have guessed that Meriem ever had existed beyond
the lap of culture and luxury.

She was sixteen now, though she easily might have passed for nineteen,
and she was very good to look upon, with her black hair and her tanned
skin and all the freshness and purity of health and innocence.  Yet she
still nursed her secret sorrow, though she no longer mentioned it to My
Dear.  Scarce an hour passed that did not bring its recollection of
Korak, and its poignant yearning to see him again.

Meriem spoke English fluently now, and read and wrote it as well.  One
day My Dear spoke jokingly to her in French and to her surprise Meriem
replied in the same tongue--slowly, it is true, and haltingly; but none
the less in excellent French, such, though, as a little child might
use.  Thereafter they spoke a little French each day, and My Dear often
marveled that the girl learned this language with a facility that was
at times almost uncanny.  At first Meriem had puckered her narrow,
arched, little eye brows as though trying to force recollection of
something all but forgotten which the new words suggested, and then, to
her own astonishment as well as to that of her teacher she had used
other French words than those in the lessons--used them properly and
with a pronunciation that the English woman knew was more perfect than
her own; but Meriem could neither read nor write what she spoke so
well, and as My Dear considered a knowledge of correct English of the
first importance, other than conversational French was postponed for a
later day.

"You doubtless heard French spoken at times in your father's douar,"
suggested My Dear, as the most reasonable explanation.

Meriem shook her head.

"It may be," she said, "but I do not recall ever having seen a
Frenchman in my father's company--he hated them and would have nothing
whatever to do with them, and I am quite sure that I never heard any of
these words before, yet at the same time I find them all familiar.  I
cannot understand it."

"Neither can I," agreed My Dear.

It was about this time that a runner brought a letter that, when she
learned the contents, filled Meriem with excitement.  Visitors were
coming!  A number of English ladies and gentlemen had accepted My
Dear's invitation to spend a month of hunting and exploring with them.
Meriem was all expectancy.  What would these strangers be like?  Would
they be as nice to her as had Bwana and My Dear, or would they be like
the other white folk she had known--cruel and relentless.  My Dear
assured her that they all were gentle folk and that she would find them
kind, considerate and honorable.

To My Dear's surprise there was none of the shyness of the wild
creature in Meriem's anticipation of the visit of strangers.

She looked forward to their coming with curiosity and with a certain
pleasurable anticipation when once she was assured that they would not
bite her.  In fact she appeared no different than would any pretty
young miss who had learned of the expected coming of company.

Korak's image was still often in her thoughts, but it aroused now a
less well-defined sense of bereavement.  A quiet sadness pervaded
Meriem when she thought of him; but the poignant grief of her loss when
it was young no longer goaded her to desperation.  Yet she was still
loyal to him.  She still hoped that some day he would find her, nor did
she doubt for a moment but that he was searching for her if he still
lived.  It was this last suggestion that caused her the greatest
perturbation.  Korak might be dead.  It scarce seemed possible that one
so well-equipped to meet the emergencies of jungle life should have
succumbed so young; yet when she had last seen him he had been beset by
a horde of armed warriors, and should he have returned to the village
again, as she well knew he must have, he may have been killed.  Even
her Korak could not, single handed, slay an entire tribe.

At last the visitors arrived.  There were three men and two women--the
wives of the two older men.  The youngest member of the party was Hon.
Morison Baynes, a young man of considerable wealth who, having
exhausted all the possibilities for pleasure offered by the capitals of
Europe, had gladly seized upon this opportunity to turn to another
continent for excitement and adventure.

He looked upon all things un-European as rather more than less
impossible, still he was not at all averse to enjoying the novelty of
unaccustomed places, and making the most of strangers indigenous
thereto, however unspeakable they might have seemed to him at home.  In
manner he was suave and courteous to all--if possible a trifle more
punctilious toward those he considered of meaner clay than toward the
few he mentally admitted to equality.

Nature had favored him with a splendid physique and a handsome face,
and also with sufficient good judgment to appreciate that while he
might enjoy the contemplation of his superiority to the masses, there
was little likelihood of the masses being equally entranced by the same
cause.  And so he easily maintained the reputation of being a most
democratic and likeable fellow, and indeed he was likable.  Just a
shade of his egotism was occasionally apparent--never sufficient to
become a burden to his associates.  And this, briefly, was the Hon.
Morison Baynes of luxurious European civilization.  What would be the
Hon.  Morison Baynes of central Africa it were difficult to guess.

Meriem, at first, was shy and reserved in the presence of the
strangers.  Her benefactors had seen fit to ignore mention of her
strange past, and so she passed as their ward whose antecedents not
having been mentioned were not to be inquired into.  The guests found
her sweet and unassuming, laughing, vivacious and a never exhausted
storehouse of quaint and interesting jungle lore.

She had ridden much during her year with Bwana and My Dear.  She knew
each favorite clump of concealing reeds along the river that the
buffalo loved best.  She knew a dozen places where lions laired, and
every drinking hole in the drier country twenty-five miles back from
the river.  With unerring precision that was almost uncanny she could
track the largest or the smallest beast to his hiding place.  But the
thing that baffled them all was her instant consciousness of the
presence of carnivora that others, exerting their faculties to the
utmost, could neither see nor hear.

The Hon. Morison Baynes found Meriem a most beautiful and charming
companion.  He was delighted with her from the first.  Particularly so,
it is possible, because he had not thought to find companionship of
this sort upon the African estate of his London friends.  They were
together a great deal as they were the only unmarried couple in the
little company.  Meriem, entirely unaccustomed to the companionship of
such as Baynes, was fascinated by him.  His tales of the great, gay
cities with which he was familiar filled her with admiration and with
wonder.  If the Hon. Morison always shone to advantage in these
narratives Meriem saw in that fact but a most natural consequence to
his presence upon the scene of his story--wherever Morison might be he
must be a hero; so thought the girl.

With the actual presence and companionship of the young Englishman the
image of Korak became less real.  Where before it had been an actuality
to her she now realized that Korak was but a memory.  To that memory
she still was loyal; but what weight has a memory in the presence of a
fascinating reality?

Meriem had never accompanied the men upon a hunt since the arrival of
the guests.  She never had cared particularly for the sport of killing.
The tracking she enjoyed; but the mere killing for the sake of killing
she could not find pleasure in--little savage that she had been, and
still, to some measure, was.  When Bwana had gone forth to shoot for
meat she had always been his enthusiastic companion; but with the
coming of the London guests the hunting had deteriorated into mere
killing.  Slaughter the host would not permit; yet the purpose of the
hunts were for heads and skins and not for food.  So Meriem remained
behind and spent her days either with My Dear upon the shaded verandah,
or riding her favorite pony across the plains or to the forest edge.
Here she would leave him untethered while she took to the trees for the
moment's unalloyed pleasures of a return to the wild, free existence of
her earlier childhood.

Then would come again visions of Korak, and, tired at last of leaping
and swinging through the trees, she would stretch herself comfortably
upon a branch and dream.  And presently, as today, she found the
features of Korak slowly dissolve and merge into those of another, and
the figure of a tanned, half-naked tarmangani become a khaki clothed
Englishman astride a hunting pony.

And while she dreamed there came to her ears from a distance, faintly,
the terrified bleating of a kid.  Meriem was instantly alert.  You or
I, even had we been able to hear the pitiful wail at so great distance,
could not have interpreted it; but to Meriem it meant a species of
terror that afflicts the ruminant when a carnivore is near and escape
impossible.

It had been both a pleasure and a sport of Korak's to rob Numa of his
prey whenever possible, and Meriem too had often joyed in the thrill
of snatching some dainty morsel almost from the very jaws of the king
of beasts.  Now, at the sound of the kid's bleat, all the well
remembered thrills recurred.  Instantly she was all excitement to play
again the game of hide and seek with death.

Quickly she loosened her riding skirt and tossed it aside--it was a
heavy handicap to successful travel in the trees.  Her boots and
stockings followed the skirt, for the bare sole of the human foot does
not slip upon dry or even wet bark as does the hard leather of a boot.
She would have liked to discard her riding breeches also, but the
motherly admonitions of My Dear had convinced Meriem that it was not
good form to go naked through the world.

At her hip hung a hunting knife.  Her rifle was still in its boot at
her pony's withers.  Her revolver she had not brought.

The kid was still bleating as Meriem started rapidly in its direction,
which she knew was straight toward a certain water hole which had once
been famous as a rendezvous for lions.  Of late there had been no
evidence of carnivora in the neighborhood of this drinking place; but
Meriem was positive that the bleating of the kid was due to the
presence of either lion or panther.

But she would soon know, for she was rapidly approaching the terrified
animal.  She wondered as she hastened onward that the sounds continued
to come from the same point.  Why did the kid not run away?  And then
she came in sight of the little animal and knew.  The kid was tethered
to a stake beside the waterhole.

Meriem paused in the branches of a near-by tree and scanned the
surrounding clearing with quick, penetrating eyes.  Where was the
hunter?  Bwana and his people did not hunt thus.  Who could have
tethered this poor little beast as a lure to Numa?  Bwana never
countenanced such acts in his country and his word was law among those
who hunted within a radius of many miles of his estate.

Some wandering savages, doubtless, thought Meriem; but where were they?
Not even her keen eyes could discover them.  And where was Numa?  Why
had he not long since sprung upon this delicious and defenseless
morsel?  That he was close by was attested by the pitiful crying of the
kid.  Ah!  Now she saw him.  He was lying close in a clump of brush a
few yards to her right.  The kid was down wind from him and getting the
full benefit of his terrorizing scent, which did not reach Meriem.

To circle to the opposite side of the clearing where the trees
approached closer to the kid.  To leap quickly to the little animal's
side and cut the tether that held him would be the work of but a
moment.  In that moment Numa might charge, and then there would be
scarce time to regain the safety of the trees, yet it might be done.
Meriem had escaped from closer quarters than that many times before.

The doubt that gave her momentary pause was caused by fear of the
unseen hunters more than by fear of Numa.  If they were stranger blacks
the spears that they held in readiness for Numa might as readily be
loosed upon whomever dared release their bait as upon the prey they
sought thus to trap.  Again the kid struggled to be free.  Again his
piteous wail touched the tender heart strings of the girl.  Tossing
discretion aside, she commenced to circle the clearing.  Only from Numa
did she attempt to conceal her presence.  At last she reached the
opposite trees.  An instant she paused to look toward the great lion,
and at the same moment she saw the huge beast rise slowly to his full
height.  A low roar betokened that he was ready.

Meriem loosened her knife and leaped to the ground.  A quick run
brought her to the side of the kid.  Numa saw her.  He lashed his tail
against his tawny sides.  He roared terribly; but, for an instant, he
remained where he stood--surprised into inaction, doubtless, by the
strange apparition that had sprung so unexpectedly from the jungle.

Other eyes were upon Meriem, too--eyes in which were no less surprise
than that reflected in the yellow-green orbs of the carnivore.  A white
man, hiding in a thorn boma, half rose as the young girl leaped into
the clearing and dashed toward the kid.  He saw Numa hesitate.  He
raised his rifle and covered the beast's breast.  The girl reached the
kid's side.  Her knife flashed, and the little prisoner was free.  With
a parting bleat it dashed off into the jungle.  Then the girl turned to
retreat toward the safety of the tree from which she had dropped so
suddenly and unexpectedly into the surprised view of the lion, the kid
and the man.

As she turned the girl's face was turned toward the hunter.  His eyes
went wide as he saw her features.  He gave a little gasp of surprise;
but now the lion demanded all his attention--the baffled, angry beast
was charging.  His breast was still covered by the motionless rifle.
The man could have fired and stopped the charge at once; but for some
reason, since he had seen the girl's face, he hesitated.  Could it be
that he did not care to save her?  Or, did he prefer, if possible, to
remain unseen by her?  It must have been the latter cause which kept
the trigger finger of the steady hand from exerting the little pressure
that would have brought the great beast to at least a temporary pause.

Like an eagle the man watched the race for life the girl was making.  A
second or two measured the time which the whole exciting event consumed
from the moment that the lion broke into his charge.  Nor once did the
rifle sights fail to cover the broad breast of the tawny sire as the
lion's course took him a little to the man's left.  Once, at the very
last moment, when escape seemed impossible, the hunter's finger
tightened ever so little upon the trigger, but almost coincidentally
the girl leaped for an over hanging branch and seized it.  The lion
leaped too; but the nimble Meriem had swung herself beyond his reach
without a second or an inch to spare.

The man breathed a sigh of relief as he lowered his rifle.  He saw the
girl fling a grimace at the angry, roaring, maneater beneath her, and
then, laughing, speed away into the forest.  For an hour the lion
remained about the water hole.  A hundred times could the hunter have
bagged his prey.  Why did he fail to do so?  Was he afraid that the
shot might attract the girl and cause her to return?

At last Numa, still roaring angrily, strode majestically into the
jungle.  The hunter crawled from his boma, and half an hour later was
entering a little camp snugly hidden in the forest.  A handful of black
followers greeted his return with sullen indifference.  He was a great
bearded man, a huge, yellow-bearded giant, when he entered his tent.
Half an hour later he emerged smooth shaven.

His blacks looked at him in astonishment.

"Would you know me?" he asked.

"The hyena that bore you would not know you, Bwana," replied one.

The man aimed a heavy fist at the black's face; but long experience in
dodging similar blows saved the presumptuous one.




Chapter 17


Meriem returned slowly toward the tree in which she had left her skirt,
her shoes and her stockings.  She was singing blithely; but her song
came to a sudden stop when she came within sight of the tree, for
there, disporting themselves with glee and pulling and hauling upon her
belongings, were a number of baboons.  When they saw her they showed no
signs of terror.  Instead they bared their fangs and growled at her.
What was there to fear in a single she-Tarmangani?  Nothing, absolutely
nothing.

In the open plain beyond the forest the hunters were returning from the
day's sport.  They were widely separated, hoping to raise a wandering
lion on the homeward journey across the plain.  The Hon.  Morison
Baynes rode closest to the forest.  As his eyes wandered back and forth
across the undulating, shrub sprinkled ground they fell upon the form
of a creature close beside the thick jungle where it terminated
abruptly at the plain's edge.

He reined his mount in the direction of his discovery.  It was yet too
far away for his untrained eyes to recognize it; but as he came closer
he saw that it was a horse, and was about to resume the original
direction of his way when he thought that he discerned a saddle upon
the beast's back.  He rode a little closer.  Yes, the animal was
saddled.  The Hon. Morison approached yet nearer, and as he did so his
eyes expressed a pleasurable emotion of anticipation, for they had now
recognized the pony as the special favorite of Meriem.

He galloped to the animal's side.  Meriem must be within the wood.  The
man shuddered a little at the thought of an unprotected girl alone in
the jungle that was still, to him, a fearful place of terrors and
stealthily stalking death.  He dismounted and left his horse beside
Meriem's.  On foot he entered the jungle.  He knew that she was
probably safe enough and he wished to surprise her by coming suddenly
upon her.

He had gone but a short distance into the wood when he heard a great
jabbering in a near-by tree.  Coming closer he saw a band of baboons
snarling over something.  Looking intently he saw that one of them held
a woman's riding skirt and that others had boots and stockings.  His
heart almost ceased to beat as he quite naturally placed the most
direful explanation upon the scene.  The baboons had killed Meriem and
stripped this clothing from her body.  Morison shuddered.

He was about to call aloud in the hope that after all the girl still
lived when he saw her in a tree close beside that was occupied by the
baboons, and now he saw that they were snarling and jabbering at her.
To his amazement he saw the girl swing, ape-like, into the tree below
the huge beasts.  He saw her pause upon a branch a few feet from the
nearest baboon.  He was about to raise his rifle and put a bullet
through the hideous creature that seemed about to leap upon her when he
heard the girl speak.  He almost dropped his rifle from surprise as a
strange jabbering, identical with that of the apes, broke from Meriem's
lips.

The baboons stopped their snarling and listened.  It was quite evident
that they were as much surprised as the Hon. Morison Baynes.  Slowly
and one by one they approached the girl.  She gave not the slightest
evidence of fear of them.  They quite surrounded her now so that Baynes
could not have fired without endangering the girl's life; but he no
longer desired to fire.  He was consumed with curiosity.

For several minutes the girl carried on what could be nothing less than
a conversation with the baboons, and then with seeming alacrity every
article of her apparel in their possession was handed over to her.  The
baboons still crowded eagerly about her as she donned them.  They
chattered to her and she chattered back.  The Hon. Morison Baynes sat
down at the foot of a tree and mopped his perspiring brow.  Then he
rose and made his way back to his mount.

When Meriem emerged from the forest a few minutes later she found him
there, and he eyed her with wide eyes in which were both wonder and a
sort of terror.

"I saw your horse here," he explained, "and thought that I would wait
and ride home with you--you do not mind?"

"Of course not," she replied.  "It will be lovely."

As they made their way stirrup to stirrup across the plain the Hon.
Morison caught himself many times watching the girl's regular profile
and wondering if his eyes had deceived him or if, in truth, he really
had seen this lovely creature consorting with grotesque baboons and
conversing with them as fluently as she conversed with him.  The thing
was uncanny--impossible; yet he had seen it with his own eyes.

And as he watched her another thought persisted in obtruding itself
into his mind.  She was most beautiful and very desirable; but what did
he know of her?  Was she not altogether impossible?  Was the scene that
he had but just witnessed not sufficient proof of her impossibility?  A
woman who climbed trees and conversed with the baboons of the jungle!
It was quite horrible!

Again the Hon. Morison mopped his brow.  Meriem glanced toward him.

"You are warm," she said.  "Now that the sun is setting I find it quite
cool.  Why do you perspire now?"

He had not intended to let her know that he had seen her with the
baboons; but quite suddenly, before he realized what he was saying, he
had blurted it out.

"I perspire from emotion," he said.  "I went into the jungle when I
discovered your pony.  I wanted to surprise you; but it was I who was
surprised.  I saw you in the trees with the baboons."

"Yes?" she said quite unemotionally, as though it was a matter of
little moment that a young girl should be upon intimate terms with
savage jungle beasts.

"It was horrible!" ejaculated the Hon. Morison.

"Horrible?" repeated Meriem, puckering her brows in bewilderment.
"What was horrible about it?  They are my friends. Is it horrible to
talk with one's friends?"

"You were really talking with them, then?" cried the Hon. Morison.
"You understood them and they understood you?"

"Certainly."

"But they are hideous creatures--degraded beasts of a lower order.  How
could you speak the language of beasts?"

"They are not hideous, and they are not degraded," replied Meriem.
"Friends are never that.  I lived among them for years before Bwana
found me and brought me here.  I scarce knew any other tongue than that
of the mangani.  Should I refuse to know them now simply because I
happen, for the present, to live among humans?"

"For the present!" ejaculated the Hon. Morison.  "You cannot mean that
you expect to return to live among them?  Come, come, what foolishness
are we talking!  The very idea!  You are spoofing me, Miss Meriem.  You
have been kind to these baboons here and they know you and do not
molest you; but that you once lived among them--no, that is
preposterous."

"But I did, though," insisted the girl, seeing the real horror that the
man felt in the presence of such an idea reflected in his tone and
manner, and rather enjoying baiting him still further.  "Yes, I lived,
almost naked, among the great apes and the lesser apes.  I dwelt among
the branches of the trees.  I pounced upon the smaller prey and
devoured it--raw.  With Korak and A'ht I hunted the antelope and the
boar, and I sat upon a tree limb and made faces at Numa, the lion, and
threw sticks at him and annoyed him until he roared so terribly in his
rage that the earth shook.

"And Korak built me a lair high among the branches of a mighty tree.
He brought me fruits and flesh.  He fought for me and was kind to
me--until I came to Bwana and My Dear I do not recall that any other
than Korak was ever kind to me."  There was a wistful note in the
girl's voice now and she had forgotten that she was bantering the Hon.
Morison.  She was thinking of Korak.  She had not thought of him a
great deal of late.

For a time both were silently absorbed in their own reflections as they
rode on toward the bungalow of their host.  The girl was thinking of a
god-like figure, a leopard skin half concealing his smooth, brown hide
as he leaped nimbly through the trees to lay an offering of food before
her on his return from a successful hunt.  Behind him, shaggy and
powerful, swung a huge anthropoid ape, while she, Meriem, laughing and
shouting her welcome, swung upon a swaying limb before the entrance to
her sylvan bower.  It was a pretty picture as she recalled it.  The
other side seldom obtruded itself upon her memory--the long, black
nights--the chill, terrible jungle nights--the cold and damp and
discomfort of the rainy season--the hideous mouthings of the savage
carnivora as they prowled through the Stygian darkness beneath--the
constant menace of Sheeta, the panther, and Histah, the snake--the
stinging insects--the loathesome vermin.  For, in truth, all these had
been outweighed by the happiness of the sunny days, the freedom of it
all, and, most, the companionship of Korak.

The man's thoughts were rather jumbled.  He had suddenly realized that
he had come mighty near falling in love with this girl of whom he had
known nothing up to the previous moment when she had voluntarily
revealed a portion of her past to him.  The more he thought upon the
matter the more evident it became to him that he had given her his
love--that he had been upon the verge of offering her his honorable
name.  He trembled a little at the narrowness of his escape.  Yet, he
still loved her.  There was no objection to that according to the
ethics of the Hon. Morison Baynes and his kind.  She was a meaner clay
than he.  He could no more have taken her in marriage than he could
have taken one of her baboon friends, nor would she, of course, expect
such an offer from him.  To have his love would be sufficient honor for
her--his name he would, naturally, bestow upon one in his own elevated
social sphere.

A girl who had consorted with apes, who, according to her own
admission, had lived almost naked among them, could have no
considerable sense of the finer qualities of virtue.  The love that he
would offer her, then, would, far from offending her, probably cover
all that she might desire or expect.

The more the Hon. Morison Baynes thought upon the subject the more
fully convinced he became that he was contemplating a most chivalrous
and unselfish act.  Europeans will better understand his point of view
than Americans, poor, benighted provincials, who are denied a true
appreciation of caste and of the fact that "the king can do no wrong."
He did not even have to argue the point that she would be much happier
amidst the luxuries of a London apartment, fortified as she would be by
both his love and his bank account, than lawfully wed to such a one as
her social position warranted.  There was one question however, which
he wished to have definitely answered before he committed himself even
to the program he was considering.

"Who were Korak and A'ht?" he asked.

"A'ht was a Mangani," replied Meriem, "and Korak a Tarmangani."

"And what, pray, might a Mangani be, and a Tarmangani?"

The girl laughed.

"You are a Tarmangani," she replied.  "The Mangani are covered with
hair--you would call them apes."

"Then Korak was a white man?" he asked.

"Yes."

"And he was--ah--your--er--your--?"  He paused, for he found it rather
difficult to go on with that line of questioning while the girl's
clear, beautiful eyes were looking straight into his.

"My what?" insisted Meriem, far too unsophisticated in her unspoiled
innocence to guess what the Hon. Morison was driving at.

"Why--ah--your brother?" he stumbled.

"No, Korak was not my brother," she replied.

"Was he your husband, then?" he finally blurted.

Far from taking offense, Meriem broke into a merry laugh.

"My husband!" she cried.  "Why how old do you think I am?  I am too
young to have a husband.  I had never thought of such a thing.  Korak
was--why--," and now she hesitated, too, for she never before had
attempted to analyse the relationship that existed between herself and
Korak--"why, Korak was just Korak," and again she broke into a gay
laugh as she realized the illuminating quality of her description.

Looking at her and listening to her the man beside her could not
believe that depravity of any sort or degree entered into the girl's
nature, yet he wanted to believe that she had not been virtuous, for
otherwise his task was less a sinecure--the Hon.  Morison was not
entirely without conscience.

For several days the Hon. Morison made no appreciable progress toward
the consummation of his scheme.  Sometimes he almost abandoned it for
he found himself time and again wondering how slight might be the
provocation necessary to trick him into making a bona-fide offer of
marriage to Meriem if he permitted himself to fall more deeply in love
with her, and it was difficult to see her daily and not love her.
There was a quality about her which, all unknown to the Hon. Morison,
was making his task an extremely difficult one--it was that quality of
innate goodness and cleanness which is a good girl's stoutest bulwark
and protection--an impregnable barrier that only degeneracy has the
effrontery to assail.  The Hon. Morison Baynes would never be
considered a degenerate.

He was sitting with Meriem upon the verandah one evening after the
others had retired.  Earlier they had been playing tennis--a game in
which the Hon. Morison shone to advantage, as, in truth, he did in most
all manly sports.  He was telling Meriem stories of London and Paris,
of balls and banquets, of the wonderful women and their wonderful
gowns, of the pleasures and pastimes of the rich and powerful.  The
Hon. Morison was a past master in the art of insidious boasting.  His
egotism was never flagrant or tiresome--he was never crude in it, for
crudeness was a plebeianism that the Hon. Morison studiously avoided,
yet the impression derived by a listener to the Hon. Morison was one
that was not at all calculated to detract from the glory of the house
of Baynes, or from that of its representative.

Meriem was entranced.  His tales were like fairy stories to this little
jungle maid.  The Hon. Morison loomed large and wonderful and
magnificent in her mind's eye.  He fascinated her, and when he drew
closer to her after a short silence and took her hand she thrilled as
one might thrill beneath the touch of a deity--a thrill of exaltation
not unmixed with fear.

He bent his lips close to her ear.

"Meriem!" he whispered.  "My little Meriem!  May I hope to have the
right to call you 'my little Meriem'?"

The girl turned wide eyes upward to his face; but it was in shadow.
She trembled but she did not draw away.  The man put an arm about her
and drew her closer.

"I love you!" he whispered.

She did not reply.  She did not know what to say.  She knew nothing of
love.  She had never given it a thought; but she did know that it was
very nice to be loved, whatever it meant.  It was nice to have people
kind to one.  She had known so little of kindness or affection.

"Tell me," he said, "that you return my love."

His lips came steadily closer to hers.  They had almost touched when a
vision of Korak sprang like a miracle before her eyes.  She saw Korak's
face close to hers, she felt his lips hot against hers, and then for
the first time in her life she guessed what love meant.  She drew away,
gently.

"I am not sure," she said, "that I love you.  Let us wait.  There is
plenty of time.  I am too young to marry yet, and I am not sure that I
should be happy in London or Paris--they rather frighten me."

How easily and naturally she had connected his avowal of love with the
idea of marriage!  The Hon. Morison was perfectly sure that he had not
mentioned marriage--he had been particularly careful not to do so.  And
then she was not sure that she loved him!  That, too, came rather in
the nature of a shock to his vanity.  It seemed incredible that this
little barbarian should have any doubts whatever as to the desirability
of the Hon. Morison Baynes.

The first flush of passion cooled, the Hon. Morison was enabled to
reason more logically.  The start had been all wrong.  It would be
better now to wait and prepare her mind gradually for the only
proposition which his exalted estate would permit him to offer her.  He
would go slow.  He glanced down at the girl's profile.  It was bathed
in the silvery light of the great tropic moon.  The Hon.  Morison
Baynes wondered if it were to be so easy a matter to "go slow."  She
was most alluring.

Meriem rose.  The vision of Korak was still before her.

"Good night," she said.  "It is almost too beautiful to leave," she
waved her hand in a comprehensive gesture which took in the starry
heavens, the great moon, the broad, silvered plain, and the dense
shadows in the distance, that marked the jungle.  "Oh, how I love it!"

"You would love London more," he said earnestly.  "And London would
love you.  You would be a famous beauty in any capital of Europe.  You
would have the world at your feet, Meriem."

"Good night!" she repeated, and left him.

The Hon. Morison selected a cigarette from his crested case, lighted
it, blew a thin line of blue smoke toward the moon, and smiled.




Chapter 18


Meriem and Bwana were sitting on the verandah together the following
day when a horseman appeared in the distance riding across the plain
toward the bungalow.  Bwana shaded his eyes with his hand and gazed out
toward the oncoming rider.  He was puzzled.  Strangers were few in
Central Africa.  Even the blacks for a distance of many miles in every
direction were well known to him.  No white man came within a hundred
miles that word of his coming did not reach Bwana long before the
stranger.  His every move was reported to the big Bwana--just what
animals he killed and how many of each species, how he killed them,
too, for Bwana would not permit the use of prussic acid or strychnine;
and how he treated his "boys."

Several European sportsmen had been turned back to the coast by the big
Englishman's orders because of unwarranted cruelty to their black
followers, and one, whose name had long been heralded in civilized
communities as that of a great sportsman, was driven from Africa with
orders never to return when Bwana found that his big bag of fourteen
lions had been made by the diligent use of poisoned bait.

The result was that all good sportsmen and all the natives loved and
respected him.  His word was law where there had never been law before.
There was scarce a head man from coast to coast who would not heed the
big Bwana's commands in preference to those of the hunters who employed
them, and so it was easy to turn back any undesirable stranger--Bwana
had simply to threaten to order his boys to desert him.

But there was evidently one who had slipped into the country
unheralded.  Bwana could not imagine who the approaching horseman might
be.  After the manner of frontier hospitality the globe round he met
the newcomer at the gate, welcoming him even before he had dismounted.
He saw a tall, well knit man of thirty or over, blonde of hair and
smooth shaven.  There was a tantalizing familiarity about him that
convinced Bwana that he should be able to call the visitor by name, yet
he was unable to do so.  The newcomer was evidently of Scandinavian
origin--both his appearance and accent denoted that.  His manner was
rough but open.  He made a good impression upon the Englishman, who was
wont to accept strangers in this wild and savage country at their own
valuation, asking no questions and assuming the best of them until they
proved themselves undeserving of his friendship and hospitality.

"It is rather unusual that a white man comes unheralded," he said, as
they walked together toward the field into which he had suggested that
the traveler might turn his pony.  "My friends, the natives, keep us
rather well-posted."

"It is probably due to the fact that I came from the south," explained
the stranger, "that you did not hear of my coming.  I have seen no
village for several marches."

"No, there are none to the south of us for many miles," replied Bwana.
"Since Kovudoo deserted his country I rather doubt that one could find
a native in that direction under two or three hundred miles."

Bwana was wondering how a lone white man could have made his way
through the savage, unhospitable miles that lay toward the south.  As
though guessing what must be passing through the other's mind, the
stranger vouchsafed an explanation.

"I came down from the north to do a little trading and hunting," he
said, "and got way off the beaten track.  My head man, who was the only
member of the safari who had ever before been in the country, took sick
and died.  We could find no natives to guide us, and so I simply swung
back straight north.  We have been living on the fruits of our guns for
over a month.  Didn't have an idea there was a white man within a
thousand miles of us when we camped last night by a water hole at the
edge of the plain.  This morning I started out to hunt and saw the
smoke from your chimney, so I sent my gun bearer back to camp with the
good news and rode straight over here myself.  Of course I've heard of
you--everybody who comes into Central Africa does--and I'd be mighty
glad of permission to rest up and hunt around here for a couple of
weeks."

"Certainly," replied Bwana.  "Move your camp up close to the river
below my boys' camp and make yourself at home."

They had reached the verandah now and Bwana was introducing the
stranger to Meriem and My Dear, who had just come from the bungalow's
interior.

"This is Mr. Hanson," he said, using the name the man had given him.
"He is a trader who has lost his way in the jungle to the south."

My Dear and Meriem bowed their acknowledgments of the introduction.
The man seemed rather ill at ease in their presence.  His host
attributed this to the fact that his guest was unaccustomed to the
society of cultured women, and so found a pretext to quickly extricate
him from his seemingly unpleasant position and lead him away to his
study and the brandy and soda which were evidently much less
embarrassing to Mr. Hanson.

When the two had left them Meriem turned toward My Dear.

"It is odd," she said, "but I could almost swear that I had known Mr.
Hanson in the past.  It is odd, but quite impossible," and she gave the
matter no further thought.

Hanson did not accept Bwana's invitation to move his camp closer to the
bungalow.  He said his boys were inclined to be quarrelsome, and so
were better off at a distance; and he, himself, was around but little,
and then always avoided coming into contact with the ladies.  A fact
which naturally aroused only laughing comment on the rough trader's
bashfulness.  He accompanied the men on several hunting trips where
they found him perfectly at home and well versed in all the finer
points of big game hunting.  Of an evening he often spent much time
with the white foreman of the big farm, evidently finding in the
society of this rougher man more common interests than the cultured
guests of Bwana possessed for him.  So it came that his was a familiar
figure about the premises by night.  He came and went as he saw fit,
often wandering along in the great flower garden that was the especial
pride and joy of My Dear and Meriem.  The first time that he had been
surprised there he apologized gruffly, explaining that he had always
been fond of the good old blooms of northern Europe which My Dear had
so successfully transplanted in African soil.

Was it, though, the ever beautiful blossoms of hollyhocks and phlox
that drew him to the perfumed air of the garden, or that other
infinitely more beautiful flower who wandered often among the blooms
beneath the great moon--the black-haired, suntanned Meriem?

For three weeks Hanson had remained.  During this time he said that his
boys were resting and gaining strength after their terrible ordeals in
the untracked jungle to the south; but he had not been as idle as he
appeared to have been.  He divided his small following into two
parties, entrusting the leadership of each to men whom he believed that
he could trust.  To them he explained his plans and the rich reward
that they would win from him if they carried his designs to a
successful conclusion.  One party he moved very slowly northward along
the trail that connects with the great caravan routes entering the
Sahara from the south.  The other he ordered straight westward with
orders to halt and go into permanent camp just beyond the great river
which marks the natural boundary of the country that the big Bwana
rightfully considers almost his own.

To his host he explained that he was moving his safari slowly toward
the north--he said nothing of the party moving westward.  Then, one
day, he announced that half his boys had deserted, for a hunting party
from the bungalow had come across his northerly camp and he feared that
they might have noticed the reduced numbers of his following.

And thus matters stood when, one hot night, Meriem, unable to sleep,
rose and wandered out into the garden.  The Hon.  Morison had been
urging his suit once more that evening, and the girl's mind was in such
a turmoil that she had been unable to sleep.

The wide heavens about her seemed to promise a greater freedom from
doubt and questioning.  Baynes had urged her to tell him that she loved
him.  A dozen times she thought that she might honestly give him the
answer that he demanded.  Korak fast was becoming but a memory.  That
he was dead she had come to believe, since otherwise he would have
sought her out.  She did not know that he had even better reason to
believe her dead, and that it was because of that belief he had made no
effort to find her after his raid upon the village of Kovudoo.

Behind a great flowering shrub Hanson lay gazing at the stars and
waiting.  He had lain thus and there many nights before.  For what was
he waiting, or for whom?  He heard the girl approaching, and half
raised himself to his elbow.  A dozen paces away, the reins looped over
a fence post, stood his pony.

Meriem, walking slowly, approached the bush behind which the waiter
lay.  Hanson drew a large bandanna handkerchief from his pocket and
rose stealthily to his knees.  A pony neighed down at the corrals.  Far
out across the plain a lion roared.  Hanson changed his position until
he squatted upon both feet, ready to come erect quickly.

Again the pony neighed--this time closer.  There was the sound of his
body brushing against shrubbery.  Hanson heard and wondered how the
animal had gotten from the corral, for it was evident that he was
already in the garden.  The man turned his head in the direction of the
beast.  What he saw sent him to the ground, huddled close beneath the
shrubbery--a man was coming, leading two ponies.

Meriem heard now and stopped to look and listen.  A moment later the
Hon. Morison Baynes drew near, the two saddled mounts at his heels.

Meriem looked up at him in surprise.  The Hon. Morison grinned
sheepishly.

"I couldn't sleep," he explained, "and was going for a bit of a ride
when I chanced to see you out here, and I thought you'd like to join
me.  Ripping good sport, you know, night riding.  Come on."

Meriem laughed.  The adventure appealed to her.

"All right," she said.

Hanson swore beneath his breath.  The two led their horses from the
garden to the gate and through it.  There they discovered Hanson's
mount.

"Why here's the trader's pony," remarked Baynes.

"He's probably down visiting with the foreman," said Meriem.

"Pretty late for him, isn't it?" remarked the Hon. Morison.  "I'd hate
to have to ride back through that jungle at night to his camp."

As though to give weight to his apprehensions the distant lion roared
again.  The Hon. Morison shivered and glanced at the girl to note the
effect of the uncanny sound upon her.  She appeared not to have noticed
it.

A moment later the two had mounted and were moving slowly across the
moon-bathed plain.  The girl turned her pony's head straight toward the
jungle.  It was in the direction of the roaring of the hungry lion.

"Hadn't we better steer clear of that fellow?" suggested the Hon.
Morison.  "I guess you didn't hear him."

"Yes, I heard him," laughed Meriem.  "Let's ride over and call on him."

The Hon. Morison laughed uneasily.  He didn't care to appear at a
disadvantage before this girl, nor did he care, either, to approach a
hungry lion too closely at night.  He carried his rifle in his saddle
boot; but moonlight is an uncertain light to shoot by, nor ever had he
faced a lion alone--even by day.  The thought gave him a distinct
nausea.  The beast ceased his roaring now.  They heard him no more and
the Hon. Morison gained courage accordingly.  They were riding down
wind toward the jungle.  The lion lay in a little swale to their right.
He was old.  For two nights he had not fed, for no longer was his
charge as swift or his spring as mighty as in the days of his prime
when he spread terror among the creatures of his wild domain.  For two
nights and days he had gone empty, and for long time before that he had
fed only upon carrion.  He was old; but he was yet a terrible engine of
destruction.

At the edge of the forest the Hon. Morison drew rein.  He had no desire
to go further.  Numa, silent upon his padded feet, crept into the
jungle beyond them.  The wind, now, was blowing gently between him and
his intended prey.  He had come a long way in search of man, for even
in his youth he had tasted human flesh and while it was poor stuff by
comparison with eland and zebra it was less difficult to kill.  In
Numa's estimation man was a slow-witted, slow-footed creature which
commanded no respect unless accompanied by the acrid odor which spelled
to the monarch's sensitive nostrils the great noise and the blinding
flash of an express rifle.

He caught the dangerous scent tonight; but he was ravenous to madness.
He would face a dozen rifles, if necessary, to fill his empty belly.
He circled about into the forest that he might again be down wind from
his victims, for should they get his scent he could not hope to
overtake them.  Numa was famished; but he was old and crafty.

Deep in the jungle another caught faintly the scent of man and of Numa
both.  He raised his head and sniffed.  He cocked it upon one side and
listened.

"Come on," said Meriem, "let's ride in a way--the forest is wonderful
at night.  It is open enough to permit us to ride."

The Hon. Morison hesitated.  He shrank from revealing his fear in the
presence of the girl.  A braver man, sure of his own position, would
have had the courage to have refused uselessly to expose the girl to
danger.  He would not have thought of himself at all; but the egotism
of the Hon. Morison required that he think always of self first.  He
had planned the ride to get Meriem away from the bungalow.  He wanted
to talk to her alone and far enough away so should she take offense at
his purposed suggestion he would have time in which to attempt to right
himself in her eyes before they reached home.  He had little doubt, of
course, but that he should succeed; but it is to his credit that he did
have some slight doubts.

"You needn't be afraid of the lion," said Meriem, noting his slight
hesitancy.  "There hasn't been a man eater around here for two years,
Bwana says, and the game is so plentiful that there is no necessity to
drive Numa to human flesh.  Then, he has been so often hunted that he
rather keeps out of man's way."

"Oh, I'm not afraid of lions," replied the Hon. Morison.  "I was just
thinking what a beastly uncomfortable place a forest is to ride in.
What with the underbrush and the low branches and all that, you know,
it's not exactly cut out for pleasure riding."

"Let's go a-foot then," suggested Meriem, and started to dismount.

"Oh, no," cried the Hon. Morison, aghast at this suggestion.  "Let's
ride," and he reined his pony into the dark shadows of the wood.
Behind him came Meriem and in front, prowling ahead waiting a favorable
opportunity, skulked Numa, the lion.

Out upon the plain a lone horseman muttered a low curse as he saw the
two disappear from sight.  It was Hanson.  He had followed them from
the bungalow.  Their way led in the direction of his camp, so he had a
ready and plausible excuse should they discover him; but they had not
seen him for they had not turned their eyes behind.

Now he turned directly toward the spot at which they had entered the
jungle.  He no longer cared whether he was observed or not.  There were
two reasons for his indifference.  The first was that he saw in Baynes'
act a counterpart of his own planned abduction of the girl.  In some
way he might turn the thing to his own purposes.  At least he would
keep in touch with them and make sure that Baynes did not get her.  His
other reason was based on his knowledge of an event that had transpired
at his camp the previous night--an event which he had not mentioned at
the bungalow for fear of drawing undesired attention to his movements
and bringing the blacks of the big Bwana into dangerous intercourse
with his own boys.  He had told at the bungalow that half his men had
deserted.  That story might be quickly disproved should his boys and
Bwana's grow confidential.

The event that he had failed to mention and which now urged him
hurriedly after the girl and her escort had occurred during his absence
early the preceding evening.  His men had been sitting around their
camp fire, entirely encircled by a high, thorn boma, when, without the
slightest warning, a huge lion had leaped amongst them and seized one
of their number.  It had been solely due to the loyalty and courage of
his comrades that his life had been saved, and then only after a battle
royal with the hunger-enraged beast had they been able to drive him off
with burning brands, spears, and rifles.

From this Hanson knew that a man eater had wandered into the district
or been developed by the aging of one of the many lions who ranged the
plains and hills by night, or lay up in the cool wood by day.  He had
heard the roaring of a hungry lion not half an hour before, and there
was little doubt in his mind but that the man eater was stalking Meriem
and Baynes.  He cursed the Englishman for a fool, and spurred rapidly
after them.

Meriem and Baynes had drawn up in a small, natural clearing.  A hundred
yards beyond them Numa lay crouching in the underbrush, his
yellow-green eyes fixed upon his prey, the tip of his sinuous tail
jerking spasmodically.  He was measuring the distance between him and
them.  He was wondering if he dared venture a charge, or should he wait
yet a little longer in the hope that they might ride straight into his
jaws.  He was very hungry; but also was he very crafty.  He could not
chance losing his meat by a hasty and ill-considered rush.  Had he
waited the night before until the blacks slept he would not have been
forced to go hungry for another twenty-four hours.

Behind him the other that had caught his scent and that of man together
came to a sitting posture upon the branch of a tree in which he had
reposed himself for slumber.  Beneath him a lumbering gray hulk swayed
to and fro in the darkness.  The beast in the tree uttered a low
guttural and dropped to the back of the gray mass.  He whispered a word
in one of the great ears and Tantor, the elephant, raised his trunk
aloft, swinging it high and low to catch the scent that the word had
warned him of.  There was another whispered word--was it a
command?--and the lumbering beast wheeled into an awkward, yet silent
shuffle, in the direction of Numa, the lion, and the stranger
Tarmangani his rider had scented.

Onward they went, the scent of the lion and his prey becoming stronger
and stronger.  Numa was becoming impatient.  How much longer must he
wait for his meat to come his way?  He lashed his tail viciously now.
He almost growled.  All unconscious of their danger the man and the
girl sat talking in the little clearing.

Their horses were pressed side by side.  Baynes had found Meriem's hand
and was pressing it as he poured words of love into her ear, and Meriem
was listening.

"Come to London with me," urged the Hon. Morison.  "I can gather a
safari and we can be a whole day upon the way to the coast before they
guess that we have gone."

"Why must we go that way?" asked the girl.  "Bwana and My Dear would
not object to our marriage."

"I cannot marry you just yet," explained the Hon. Morison, "there are
some formalities to be attended to first--you do not understand.  It
will be all right.  We will go to London.  I cannot wait.  If you love
me you will come.  What of the apes you lived with?  Did they bother
about marriage?  They love as we love.  Had you stayed among them you
would have mated as they mate.  It is the law of nature--no man-made
law can abrogate the laws of God.  What difference does it make if we
love one another?  What do we care for anyone in the world besides
ourselves?  I would give my life for you--will you give nothing for me?"

"You love me?" she said.  "You will marry me when we have reached
London?"

"I swear it," he cried.

"I will go with you," she whispered, "though I do not understand why it
is necessary."  She leaned toward him and he took her in his arms and
bent to press his lips to hers.

At the same instant the head of a huge tusker poked through the trees
that fringed the clearing.  The Hon. Morison and Meriem, with eyes and
ears for one another alone, did not see or hear; but Numa did.  The man
upon Tantor's broad head saw the girl in the man's arms.  It was Korak;
but in the trim figure of the neatly garbed girl he did not recognize
his Meriem.  He only saw a Tarmangani with his she.  And then Numa
charged.

With a frightful roar, fearful lest Tantor had come to frighten away
his prey, the great beast leaped from his hiding place.  The earth
trembled to his mighty voice.  The ponies stood for an instant
transfixed with terror.  The Hon. Morison Baynes went white and cold.
The lion was charging toward them full in the brilliant light of the
magnificent moon.  The muscles of the Hon.  Morison no longer obeyed
his will--they flexed to the urge of a greater power--the power of
Nature's first law.  They drove his spurred heels deep into his pony's
flanks, they bore the rein against the brute's neck that wheeled him
with an impetuous drive toward the plain and safety.

The girl's pony, squealing in terror, reared and plunged upon the heels
of his mate.  The lion was close upon him.  Only the girl was cool--the
girl and the half-naked savage who bestrode the neck of his mighty
mount and grinned at the exciting spectacle chance had staked for his
enjoyment.

To Korak here were but two strange Tarmangani pursued by Numa, who was
empty.  It was Numa's right to prey; but one was a she.  Korak felt an
intuitive urge to rush to her protection.  Why, he could not guess.
All Tarmangani were enemies now.  He had lived too long a beast to feel
strongly the humanitarian impulses that were inherent in him--yet feel
them he did, for the girl at least.

He urged Tantor forward.  He raised his heavy spear and hurled it at
the flying target of the lion's body.  The girl's pony had reached the
trees upon the opposite side of the clearing.  Here he would become
easy prey to the swiftly moving lion; but Numa, infuriated, preferred
the woman upon his back.  It was for her he leaped.

Korak gave an exclamation of astonishment and approval as Numa landed
upon the pony's rump and at the same instant the girl swung free of her
mount to the branches of a tree above her.

Korak's spear struck Numa in the shoulder, knocking him from his
precarious hold upon the frantically plunging horse.  Freed of the
weight of both girl and lion the pony raced ahead toward safety.  Numa
tore and struck at the missile in his shoulder but could not dislodge
it.  Then he resumed the chase.

Korak guided Tantor into the seclusion of the jungle.  He did not wish
to be seen, nor had he.

Hanson had almost reached the wood when he heard the lion's terrific
roars, and knew that the charge had come.  An instant later the Hon.
Morison broke upon his vision, racing like mad for safety.  The man lay
flat upon his pony's back hugging the animal's neck tightly with both
arms and digging the spurs into his sides.  An instant later the second
pony appeared--riderless.

Hanson groaned as he guessed what had happened out of sight in the
jungle.  With an oath he spurred on in the hope of driving the lion
from his prey--his rifle was ready in his hand.  And then the lion came
into view behind the girl's pony.  Hanson could not understand.  He
knew that if Numa had succeeded in seizing the girl he would not have
continued in pursuit of the others.

He drew in his own mount, took quick aim and fired.  The lion stopped
in his tracks, turned and bit at his side, then rolled over dead.
Hanson rode on into the forest, calling aloud to the girl.

"Here I am," came a quick response from the foliage of the trees just
ahead.  "Did you hit him?"

"Yes," replied Hanson.  "Where are you?  You had a mighty narrow
escape.  It will teach you to keep out of the jungle at night."

Together they returned to the plain where they found the Hon.  Morison
riding slowly back toward them.  He explained that his pony had bolted
and that he had had hard work stopping him at all.  Hanson grinned, for
he recalled the pounding heels that he had seen driving sharp spurs
into the flanks of Baynes' mount; but he said nothing of what he had
seen.  He took Meriem up behind him and the three rode in silence
toward the bungalow.




Chapter 19


Behind them Korak emerged from the jungle and recovered his spear from
Numa's side.  He still was smiling.  He had enjoyed the spectacle
exceedingly.  There was one thing that troubled him--the agility with
which the she had clambered from her pony's back into the safety of the
tree ABOVE her.  That was more like mangani--more like his lost Meriem.
He sighed.  His lost Meriem!  His little, dead Meriem!  He wondered if
this she stranger resembled his Meriem in other ways.  A great longing
to see her overwhelmed him.  He looked after the three figures moving
steadily across the plain.  He wondered where might lie their
destination.  A desire to follow them came over him, but he only stood
there watching until they had disappeared in the distance.  The sight
of the civilized girl and the dapper, khaki clad Englishman had aroused
in Korak memories long dormant.

Once he had dreamed of returning to the world of such as these; but
with the death of Meriem hope and ambition seemed to have deserted him.
He cared now only to pass the remainder of his life in solitude, as far
from man as possible.  With a sigh he turned slowly back into the
jungle.

Tantor, nervous by nature, had been far from reassured by close
proximity to the three strange whites, and with the report of Hanson's
rifle had turned and ambled away at his long, swinging shuffle.  He was
nowhere in sight when Korak returned to look for him.  The ape-man,
however, was little concerned by the absence of his friend.  Tantor had
a habit of wandering off unexpectedly.  For a month they might not see
one another, for Korak seldom took the trouble to follow the great
pachyderm, nor did he upon this occasion.  Instead he found a
comfortable perch in a large tree and was soon asleep.

At the bungalow Bwana had met the returning adventurers on the
verandah.  In a moment of wakefulness he had heard the report of
Hanson's rifle far out across the plain, and wondered what it might
mean.  Presently it had occurred to him that the man whom he considered
in the light of a guest might have met with an accident on his way back
to camp, so he had arisen and gone to his foreman's quarters where he
had learned that Hanson had been there earlier in the evening but had
departed several hours before.  Returning from the foreman's quarters
Bwana had noticed that the corral gate was open and further
investigation revealed the fact that Meriem's pony was gone and also
the one most often used by Baynes.  Instantly Bwana assumed that the
shot had been fired by Hon. Morison, and had again aroused his foreman
and was making preparations to set forth in investigation when he had
seen the party approaching across the plain.

Explanation on the part of the Englishman met a rather chilly reception
from his host.  Meriem was silent.  She saw that Bwana was angry with
her.  It was the first time and she was heart broken.

"Go to your room, Meriem," he said; "and Baynes, if you will step into
my study, I'd like to have a word with you in a moment."

He stepped toward Hanson as the others turned to obey him.  There was
something about Bwana even in his gentlest moods that commanded instant
obedience.

"How did you happen to be with them, Hanson?" he asked.

"I'd been sitting in the garden," replied the trader, "after leaving
Jervis' quarters.  I have a habit of doing that as your lady probably
knows.  Tonight I fell asleep behind a bush, and was awakened by them
two spooning.  I couldn't hear what they said, but presently Baynes
brings two ponies and they ride off.  I didn't like to interfere for it
wasn't any of my business, but I knew they hadn't ought to be ridin'
about that time of night, leastways not the girl--it wasn't right and
it wasn't safe.  So I follows them and it's just as well I did.  Baynes
was gettin' away from the lion as fast as he could, leavin' the girl to
take care of herself, when I got a lucky shot into the beast's shoulder
that fixed him."

Hanson paused.  Both men were silent for a time.  Presently the trader
coughed in an embarrassed manner as though there was something on his
mind he felt in duty bound to say, but hated to.

"What is it, Hanson?" asked Bwana.  "You were about to say something
weren't you?"

"Well, you see it's like this," ventured Hanson.  "Bein' around here
evenings a good deal I've seen them two together a lot, and, beggin'
your pardon, sir, but I don't think Mr. Baynes means the girl any good.
I've overheard enough to make me think he's tryin' to get her to run
off with him."  Hanson, to fit his own ends, hit nearer the truth than
he knew.  He was afraid that Baynes would interfere with his own plans,
and he had hit upon a scheme to both utilize the young Englishman and
get rid of him at the same time.

"And I thought," continued the trader, "that inasmuch as I'm about due
to move you might like to suggest to Mr. Baynes that he go with me.
I'd be willin' to take him north to the caravan trails as a favor to
you, sir."

Bwana stood in deep thought for a moment.  Presently he looked up.

"Of course, Hanson, Mr. Baynes is my guest," he said, a grim twinkle in
his eye.  "Really I cannot accuse him of planning to run away with
Meriem on the evidence that we have, and as he is my guest I should
hate to be so discourteous as to ask him to leave; but, if I recall his
words correctly, it seems to me that he has spoken of returning home,
and I am sure that nothing would delight him more than going north with
you--you say you start tomorrow?  I think Mr. Baynes will accompany
you.  Drop over in the morning, if you please, and now good night, and
thank you for keeping a watchful eye on Meriem."

Hanson hid a grin as he turned and sought his saddle.  Bwana stepped
from the verandah to his study, where he found the Hon. Morison pacing
back and forth, evidently very ill at ease.

"Baynes," said Bwana, coming directly to the point, "Hanson is leaving
for the north tomorrow.  He has taken a great fancy to you, and just
asked me to say to you that he'd be glad to have you accompany him.
Good night, Baynes."

At Bwana's suggestion Meriem kept to her room the following morning
until after the Hon. Morison Baynes had departed.  Hanson had come for
him early--in fact he had remained all night with the foreman, Jervis,
that they might get an early start.

The farewell exchanges between the Hon. Morison and his host were of
the most formal type, and when at last the guest rode away Bwana
breathed a sigh of relief.  It had been an unpleasant duty and he was
glad that it was over; but he did not regret his action.  He had not
been blind to Baynes' infatuation for Meriem, and knowing the young
man's pride in caste he had never for a moment believed that his guest
would offer his name to this nameless Arab girl, for, extremely light
in color though she was for a full blood Arab, Bwana believed her to be
such.

He did not mention the subject again to Meriem, and in this he made a
mistake, for the young girl, while realizing the debt of gratitude she
owed Bwana and My Dear, was both proud and sensitive, so that Bwana's
action in sending Baynes away and giving her no opportunity to explain
or defend hurt and mortified her.  Also it did much toward making a
martyr of Baynes in her eyes and arousing in her breast a keen feeling
of loyalty toward him.

What she had half-mistaken for love before, she now wholly mistook for
love.  Bwana and My Dear might have told her much of the social
barriers that they only too well knew Baynes must feel existed between
Meriem and himself, but they hesitated to wound her.  It would have
been better had they inflicted this lesser sorrow, and saved the child
the misery that was to follow because of her ignorance.

As Hanson and Baynes rode toward the former's camp the Englishman
maintained a morose silence.  The other was attempting to formulate an
opening that would lead naturally to the proposition he had in mind.
He rode a neck behind his companion, grinning as he noted the sullen
scowl upon the other's patrician face.

"Rather rough on you, wasn't he?" he ventured at last, jerking his head
back in the direction of the bungalow as Baynes turned his eyes upon
him at the remark.  "He thinks a lot of the girl," continued Hanson,
"and don't want nobody to marry her and take her away; but it looks to
me as though he was doin' her more harm than good in sendin' you away.
She ought to marry some time, and she couldn't do better than a fine
young gentleman like you."

Baynes, who had at first felt inclined to take offense at the mention
of his private affairs by this common fellow, was mollified by Hanson's
final remark, and immediately commenced to see in him a man of fine
discrimination.

"He's a darned bounder," grumbled the Hon. Morison; "but I'll get even
with him.  He may be the whole thing in Central Africa but I'm as big
as he is in London, and he'll find it out when he comes home."

"If I was you," said Hanson, "I wouldn't let any man keep me from
gettin' the girl I want.  Between you and me I ain't got no use for him
either, and if I can help you any way just call on me."

"It's mighty good of you, Hanson," replied Baynes, warming up a bit;
"but what can a fellow do here in this God-forsaken hole?"

"I know what I'd do," said Hanson.  "I'd take the girl along with me.
If she loves you she'll go, all right."

"It can't be done," said Baynes.  "He bosses this whole blooming
country for miles around.  He'd be sure to catch us."

"No, he wouldn't, not with me running things," said Hanson.  "I've been
trading and hunting here for ten years and I know as much about the
country as he does.  If you want to take the girl along I'll help you,
and I'll guarantee that there won't nobody catch up with us before we
reach the coast.  I'll tell you what, you write her a note and I'll get
it to her by my head man.  Ask her to meet you to say goodbye--she
won't refuse that.  In the meantime we can be movin' camp a little
further north all the time and you can make arrangements with her to be
all ready on a certain night.  Tell her I'll meet her then while you
wait for us in camp.  That'll be better for I know the country well and
can cover it quicker than you.  You can take care of the safari and be
movin' along slow toward the north and the girl and I'll catch up to
you."

"But suppose she won't come?" suggested Baynes.

"Then make another date for a last good-bye," said Hanson, "and instead
of you I'll be there and I'll bring her along anyway.  She'll have to
come, and after it's all over she won't feel so bad about
it--especially after livin' with you for two months while we're makin'
the coast."

A shocked and angry protest rose to Baynes' lips; but he did not utter
it, for almost simultaneously came the realization that this was
practically the same thing he had been planning upon himself.  It had
sounded brutal and criminal from the lips of the rough trader; but
nevertheless the young Englishman saw that with Hanson's help and his
knowledge of African travel the possibilities of success would be much
greater than as though the Hon. Morison were to attempt the thing
single handed.  And so he nodded a glum assent.

The balance of the long ride to Hanson's northerly camp was made in
silence, for both men were occupied with their own thoughts, most of
which were far from being either complimentary or loyal to the other.
As they rode through the wood the sounds of their careless passage came
to the ears of another jungle wayfarer.  The Killer had determined to
come back to the place where he had seen the white girl who took to the
trees with the ability of long habitude.  There was a compelling
something in the recollection of her that drew him irresistibly toward
her.  He wished to see her by the light of day, to see her features, to
see the color of her eyes and hair.  It seemed to him that she must
bear a strong resemblance to his lost Meriem, and yet he knew that the
chances were that she did not.  The fleeting glimpse that he had had of
her in the moonlight as she swung from the back of her plunging pony
into the branches of the tree above her had shown him a girl of about
the same height as his Meriem; but of a more rounded and developed
femininity.

Now he was moving lazily back in the direction of the spot where he had
seen the girl when the sounds of the approaching horsemen came to his
sharp ears.  He moved stealthily through the branches until he came
within sight of the riders.  The younger man he instantly recognized as
the same he had seen with his arms about the girl in the moonlit glade
just the instant before Numa charged.  The other he did not recognize
though there was a familiarity about his carriage and figure that
puzzled Korak.

The ape-man decided that to find the girl again he would but have to
keep in touch with the young Englishman, and so he fell in behind the
pair, following them to Hanson's camp.  Here the Hon. Morison penned a
brief note, which Hanson gave into the keeping of one of his boys who
started off forthwith toward the south.

Korak remained in the vicinity of the camp, keeping a careful watch
upon the Englishman.  He had half expected to find the girl at the
destination of the two riders and had been disappointed when no sign of
her materialized about the camp.

Baynes was restless, pacing back and forth beneath the trees when he
should have been resting against the forced marches of the coming
flight.  Hanson lay in his hammock and smoked.  They spoke but little.
Korak lay stretched upon a branch among the dense foliage above them.
Thus passed the balance of the afternoon.  Korak became hungry and
thirsty.  He doubted that either of the men would leave camp now before
morning, so he withdrew, but toward the south, for there it seemed most
likely the girl still was.

In the garden beside the bungalow Meriem wandered thoughtfully in the
moonlight.  She still smarted from Bwana's, to her, unjust treatment of
the Hon. Morison Baynes.  Nothing had been explained to her, for both
Bwana and My Dear had wished to spare her the mortification and sorrow
of the true explanation of Baynes' proposal.  They knew, as Meriem did
not, that the man had no intention of marrying her, else he would have
come directly to Bwana, knowing full well that no objection would be
interposed if Meriem really cared for him.

Meriem loved them both and was grateful to them for all that they had
done for her; but deep in her little heart surged the savage love of
liberty that her years of untrammeled freedom in the jungle had made
part and parcel of her being.  Now, for the first time since she had
come to them, Meriem felt like a prisoner in the bungalow of Bwana and
My Dear.

Like a caged tigress the girl paced the length of the enclosure.  Once
she paused near the outer fence, her head upon one side--listening.
What was it she had heard?  The pad of naked human feet just beyond the
garden.  She listened for a moment.  The sound was not repeated.  Then
she resumed her restless walking.  Down to the opposite end of the
garden she passed, turned and retraced her steps toward the upper end.
Upon the sward near the bushes that hid the fence, full in the glare of
the moonlight, lay a white envelope that had not been there when she
had turned almost upon the very spot a moment before.

Meriem stopped short in her tracks, listening again, and sniffing--more
than ever the tigress; alert, ready.  Beyond the bushes a naked black
runner squatted, peering through the foliage.  He saw her take a step
closer to the letter.  She had seen it.  He rose quietly and following
the shadows of the bushes that ran down to the corral was soon gone
from sight.

Meriem's trained ears heard his every move.  She made no attempt to
seek closer knowledge of his identity.  Already she had guessed that he
was a messenger from the Hon. Morison.  She stooped and picked up the
envelope.  Tearing it open she easily read the contents by the moon's
brilliant light.  It was, as she had guessed, from Baynes.

"I cannot go without seeing you again," it read.  "Come to the clearing
early tomorrow morning and say good-bye to me.  Come alone."

There was a little more--words that made her heart beat faster and a
happy flush mount her cheek.




Chapter 20


It was still dark when the Hon. Morison Baynes set forth for the
trysting place.  He insisted upon having a guide, saying that he was
not sure that he could find his way back to the little clearing.  As a
matter of fact the thought of that lonely ride through the darkness
before the sun rose had been too much for his courage, and he craved
company.  A black, therefore, preceded him on foot.  Behind and above
him came Korak, whom the noise in the camp had awakened.

It was nine o'clock before Baynes drew rein in the clearing.  Meriem
had not yet arrived.  The black lay down to rest.  Baynes lolled in his
saddle.  Korak stretched himself comfortably upon a lofty limb, where
he could watch those beneath him without being seen.

An hour passed.  Baynes gave evidence of nervousness.  Korak had
already guessed that the young Englishman had come here to meet
another, nor was he at all in doubt as to the identity of that other.
The Killer was perfectly satisfied that he was soon again to see the
nimble she who had so forcefully reminded him of Meriem.

Presently the sound of an approaching horse came to Korak's ears.  She
was coming!  She had almost reached the clearing before Baynes became
aware of her presence, and then as he looked up, the foliage parted to
the head and shoulders of her mount and Meriem rode into view.  Baynes
spurred to meet her.  Korak looked searchingly down upon her, mentally
anathematizing the broad-brimmed hat that hid her features from his
eyes.  She was abreast the Englishman now.  Korak saw the man take both
her hands and draw her close to his breast.  He saw the man's face
concealed for a moment beneath the same broad brim that hid the girl's.
He could imagine their lips meeting, and a twinge of sorrow and sweet
recollection combined to close his eyes for an instant in that
involuntary muscular act with which we attempt to shut out from the
mind's eye harrowing reflections.

When he looked again they had drawn apart and were conversing
earnestly.  Korak could see the man urging something.  It was equally
evident that the girl was holding back.  There were many of her
gestures, and the way in which she tossed her head up and to the right,
tip-tilting her chin, that reminded Korak still more strongly of
Meriem.  And then the conversation was over and the man took the girl
in his arms again to kiss her good-bye.  She turned and rode toward the
point from which she had come.  The man sat on his horse watching her.
At the edge of the jungle she turned to wave him a final farewell.

"Tonight!" she cried, throwing back her head as she called the words to
him across the little distance which separated them--throwing back her
head and revealing her face for the first time to the eyes of The
Killer in the tree above.  Korak started as though pierced through the
heart with an arrow.  He trembled and shook like a leaf.  He closed his
eyes, pressing his palms across them, and then he opened them again and
looked but the girl was gone--only the waving foliage of the jungle's
rim marked where she had disappeared.  It was impossible!  It could not
be true!  And yet, with his own eyes he had seen his Meriem--older a
little, with figure more rounded by nearer maturity, and subtly changed
in other ways; more beautiful than ever, yet still his little Meriem.
Yes, he had seen the dead alive again; he had seen his Meriem in the
flesh.  She lived!  She had not died!  He had seen her--he had seen his
Meriem--IN THE ARMS OF ANOTHER MAN!  And that man sat below him now,
within easy reach.  Korak, The Killer, fondled his heavy spear.  He
played with the grass rope dangling from his gee-string.  He stroked
the hunting knife at his hip.  And the man beneath him called to his
drowsy guide, bent the rein to his pony's neck and moved off toward the
north.  Still sat Korak, The Killer, alone among the trees.  Now his
hands hung idly at his sides.  His weapons and what he had intended
were forgotten for the moment.  Korak was thinking.  He had noted that
subtle change in Meriem.  When last he had seen her she had been his
little, half-naked Mangani--wild, savage, and uncouth.  She had not
seemed uncouth to him then; but now, in the change that had come over
her, he knew that such she had been; yet no more uncouth than he, and
he was still uncouth.

In her had taken place the change.  In her he had just seen a sweet and
lovely flower of refinement and civilization, and he shuddered as he
recalled the fate that he himself had planned for her--to be the mate
of an ape-man, his mate, in the savage jungle.  Then he had seen no
wrong in it, for he had loved her, and the way he had planned had been
the way of the jungle which they two had chosen as their home; but now,
after having seen the Meriem of civilized attire, he realized the
hideousness of his once cherished plan, and he thanked God that chance
and the blacks of Kovudoo had thwarted him.

Yet he still loved her, and jealousy seared his soul as he recalled the
sight of her in the arms of the dapper young Englishman.  What were his
intentions toward her?  Did he really love her?  How could one not love
her?  And she loved him, of that Korak had had ample proof.  Had she
not loved him she would not have accepted his kisses.  His Meriem loved
another!  For a long time he let that awful truth sink deep, and from
it he tried to reason out his future plan of action.  In his heart was
a great desire to follow the man and slay him; but ever there rose in
his consciousness the thought: She loves him.  Could he slay the
creature Meriem loved?  Sadly he shook his head.  No, he could not.
Then came a partial decision to follow Meriem and speak with her.  He
half started, and then glanced down at his nakedness and was ashamed.
He, the son of a British peer, had thus thrown away his life, had thus
degraded himself to the level of a beast that he was ashamed to go to
the woman he loved and lay his love at her feet.  He was ashamed to go
to the little Arab maid who had been his jungle playmate, for what had
he to offer her?

For years circumstances had prevented a return to his father and
mother, and at last pride had stepped in and expunged from his mind the
last vestige of any intention to return.  In a spirit of boyish
adventure he had cast his lot with the jungle ape.  The killing of the
crook in the coast inn had filled his childish mind with terror of the
law, and driven him deeper into the wilds.  The rebuffs that he had met
at the hands of men, both black and white, had had their effect upon
his mind while yet it was in a formative state, and easily influenced.

He had come to believe that the hand of man was against him, and then
he had found in Meriem the only human association he required or
craved.  When she had been snatched from him his sorrow had been so
deep that the thought of ever mingling again with human beings grew
still more unutterably distasteful.  Finally and for all time, he
thought, the die was cast.  Of his own volition he had become a beast,
a beast he had lived, a beast he would die.

Now that it was too late, he regretted it.  For now Meriem, still
living, had been revealed to him in a guise of progress and advancement
that had carried her completely out of his life.  Death itself could
not have further removed her from him.  In her new world she loved a
man of her own kind.  And Korak knew that it was right.  She was not
for him--not for the naked, savage ape.  No, she was not for him; but
he still was hers.  If he could not have her and happiness, he would at
least do all that lay in his power to assure happiness to her.  He
would follow the young Englishman.  In the first place he would know
that he meant Meriem no harm, and after that, though jealousy wrenched
his heart, he would watch over the man Meriem loved, for Meriem's sake;
but God help that man if he thought to wrong her!

Slowly he aroused himself.  He stood erect and stretched his great
frame, the muscles of his arms gliding sinuously beneath his tanned
skin as he bent his clenched fists behind his head.  A movement on the
ground beneath caught his eye.  An antelope was entering the clearing.
Immediately Korak became aware that he was empty--again he was a beast.
For a moment love had lifted him to sublime heights of honor and
renunciation.

The antelope was crossing the clearing.  Korak dropped to the ground
upon the opposite side of the tree, and so lightly that not even the
sensitive ears of the antelope apprehended his presence.  He uncoiled
his grass rope--it was the latest addition to his armament, yet he was
proficient with it.  Often he traveled with nothing more than his knife
and his rope--they were light and easy to carry.  His spear and bow and
arrows were cumbersome and he usually kept one or all of them hidden
away in a private cache.

Now he held a single coil of the long rope in his right hand, and the
balance in his left.  The antelope was but a few paces from him.
Silently Korak leaped from his hiding place swinging the rope free from
the entangling shrubbery.  The antelope sprang away almost instantly;
but instantly, too, the coiled rope, with its sliding noose, flew
through the air above him.  With unerring precision it settled about
the creature's neck.  There was a quick wrist movement of the thrower,
the noose tightened.  The Killer braced himself with the rope across
his hip, and as the antelope tautened the singing strands in a last
frantic bound for liberty he was thrown over upon his back.

Then, instead of approaching the fallen animal as a roper of the
western plains might do, Korak dragged his captive to himself, pulling
him in hand over hand, and when he was within reach leaping upon him
even as Sheeta the panther might have done, and burying his teeth in
the animal's neck while he found its heart with the point of his
hunting knife.  Recoiling his rope, he cut a few generous strips from
his kill and took to the trees again, where he ate in peace.  Later he
swung off in the direction of a nearby water hole, and then he slept.

In his mind, of course, was the suggestion of another meeting between
Meriem and the young Englishman that had been borne to him by the
girl's parting:  "Tonight!"

He had not followed Meriem because he knew from the direction from
which she had come and in which she returned that wheresoever she had
found an asylum it lay out across the plains and not wishing to be
discovered by the girl he had not cared to venture into the open after
her.  It would do as well to keep in touch with the young man, and that
was precisely what he intended doing.

To you or me the possibility of locating the Hon. Morison in the jungle
after having permitted him to get such a considerable start might have
seemed remote; but to Korak it was not at all so.  He guessed that the
white man would return to his camp; but should he have done otherwise
it would be a simple matter to The Killer to trail a mounted man
accompanied by another on foot.  Days might pass and still such a spoor
would be sufficiently plain to lead Korak unfalteringly to its end;
while a matter of a few hours only left it as clear to him as though
the makers themselves were still in plain sight.

And so it came that a few minutes after the Hon. Morison Baynes entered
the camp to be greeted by Hanson, Korak slipped noiselessly into a
near-by tree.  There he lay until late afternoon and still the young
Englishman made no move to leave camp.  Korak wondered if Meriem were
coming there.  A little later Hanson and one of his black boys rode out
of camp.  Korak merely noted the fact.  He was not particularly
interested in what any other member of the company than the young
Englishman did.

Darkness came and still the young man remained.  He ate his evening
meal, afterward smoking numerous cigarettes.  Presently he began to
pace back and forth before his tent.  He kept his boy busy replenishing
the fire.  A lion coughed and he went into his tent to reappear with an
express rifle.  Again he admonished the boy to throw more brush upon
the fire.  Korak saw that he was nervous and afraid, and his lip curled
in a sneer of contempt.

Was this the creature who had supplanted him in the heart of his
Meriem?  Was this a man, who trembled when Numa coughed?  How could
such as he protect Meriem from the countless dangers of the jungle?
Ah, but he would not have to.  They would live in the safety of
European civilization, where men in uniforms were hired to protect
them.  What need had a European of prowess to protect his mate?  Again
the sneer curled Korak's lip.

Hanson and his boy had ridden directly to the clearing.  It was already
dark when they arrived.  Leaving the boy there Hanson rode to the edge
of the plain, leading the boy's horse.  There he waited.  It was nine
o'clock before he saw a solitary figure galloping toward him from the
direction of the bungalow.  A few moments later Meriem drew in her
mount beside him.  She was nervous and flushed.  When she recognized
Hanson she drew back, startled.

"Mr. Baynes' horse fell on him and sprained his ankle," Hanson hastened
to explain.  "He couldn't very well come so he sent me to meet you and
bring you to camp."

The girl could not see in the darkness the gloating, triumphant
expression on the speaker's face.

"We had better hurry," continued Hanson, "for we'll have to move along
pretty fast if we don't want to be overtaken."

"Is he hurt badly?" asked Meriem.

"Only a little sprain," replied Hanson.  "He can ride all right; but we
both thought he'd better lie up tonight, and rest, for he'll have
plenty hard riding in the next few weeks."

"Yes," agreed the girl.

Hanson swung his pony about and Meriem followed him.  They rode north
along the edge of the jungle for a mile and then turned straight into
it toward the west.  Meriem, following, payed little attention to
directions.  She did not know exactly where Hanson's camp lay and so
she did not guess that he was not leading her toward it.  All night
they rode, straight toward the west.  When morning came, Hanson
permitted a short halt for breakfast, which he had provided in
well-filled saddle bags before leaving his camp.  Then they pushed on
again, nor did they halt a second time until in the heat of the day he
stopped and motioned the girl to dismount.

"We will sleep here for a time and let the ponies graze," he said.

"I had no idea the camp was so far away," said Meriem.

"I left orders that they were to move on at day break," explained the
trader, "so that we could get a good start.  I knew that you and I
could easily overtake a laden safari.  It may not be until tomorrow
that we'll catch up with them."

But though they traveled part of the night and all the following day no
sign of the safari appeared ahead of them.  Meriem, an adept in jungle
craft, knew that none had passed ahead of them for many days.
Occasionally she saw indications of an old spoor, a very old spoor, of
many men.  For the most part they followed this well-marked trail along
elephant paths and through park-like groves.  It was an ideal trail for
rapid traveling.

Meriem at last became suspicious.  Gradually the attitude of the man at
her side had begun to change.  Often she surprised him devouring her
with his eyes.  Steadily the former sensation of previous
acquaintanceship urged itself upon her.  Somewhere, sometime before she
had known this man.  It was evident that he had not shaved for several
days.  A blonde stubble had commenced to cover his neck and cheeks and
chin, and with it the assurance that he was no stranger continued to
grow upon the girl.

It was not until the second day, however, that Meriem rebelled.  She
drew in her pony at last and voiced her doubts. Hanson assured her that
the camp was but a few miles further on.

"We should have overtaken them yesterday," he said.  "They must have
marched much faster than I had believed possible."

"They have not marched here at all," said Meriem.  "The spoor that we
have been following is weeks old."

Hanson laughed.

"Oh, that's it, is it?" he cried.  "Why didn't you say so before?  I
could have easily explained.  We are not coming by the same route; but
we'll pick up their trail sometime today, even if we don't overtake
them."

Now, at last, Meriem knew the man was lying to her.  What a fool he
must be to think that anyone could believe such a ridiculous
explanation?  Who was so stupid as to believe that they could have
expected to overtake another party, and he had certainly assured her
that momentarily he expected to do so, when that party's route was not
to meet theirs for several miles yet?

She kept her own counsel however, planning to escape at the first
opportunity when she might have a sufficient start of her captor, as
she now considered him, to give her some assurance of outdistancing
him.  She watched his face continually when she could without being
observed.  Tantalizingly the placing of his familiar features persisted
in eluding her.  Where had she known him?  Under what conditions had
they met before she had seen him about the farm of Bwana?  She ran over
in her mind all the few white men she ever had known.  There were some
who had come to her father's douar in the jungle.  Few it is true, but
there had been some.  Ah, now she had it!  She had seen him there!  She
almost seized upon his identity and then in an instant, it had slipped
from her again.

It was mid afternoon when they suddenly broke out of the jungle upon
the banks of a broad and placid river.  Beyond, upon the opposite
shore, Meriem described a camp surrounded by a high, thorn boma.

"Here we are at last," said Hanson.  He drew his revolver and fired in
the air.  Instantly the camp across the river was astir.  Black men ran
down the river's bank.  Hanson hailed them.  But there was no sign of
the Hon. Morison Baynes.

In accordance with their master's instructions the blacks manned a
canoe and rowed across.  Hanson placed Meriem in the little craft and
entered it himself, leaving two boys to watch the horses, which the
canoe was to return for and swim across to the camp side of the river.

Once in the camp Meriem asked for Baynes.  For the moment her fears had
been allayed by the sight of the camp, which she had come to look upon
as more or less a myth.  Hanson pointed toward the single tent that
stood in the center of the enclosure.

"There," he said, and preceded her toward it.  At the entrance he held
the flap aside and motioned her within.  Meriem entered and looked
about.  The tent was empty.  She turned toward Hanson.  There was a
broad grin on his face.

"Where is Mr. Baynes?" she demanded.

"He ain't here," replied Hanson.  "Leastwise I don't see him, do you?
But I'm here, and I'm a damned sight better man than that thing ever
was.  You don't need him no more--you got me," and he laughed
uproariously and reached for her.

Meriem struggled to free herself.  Hanson encircled her arms and body
in his powerful grip and bore her slowly backward toward the pile of
blankets at the far end of the tent.  His face was bent close to hers.
His eyes were narrowed to two slits of heat and passion and desire.
Meriem was looking full into his face as she fought for freedom when
there came over her a sudden recollection of a similar scene in which
she had been a participant and with it full recognition of her
assailant.  He was the Swede Malbihn who had attacked her once before,
who had shot his companion who would have saved her, and from whom she
had been rescued by Bwana.  His smooth face had deceived her; but now
with the growing beard and the similarity of conditions recognition
came swift and sure.

But today there would be no Bwana to save her.




Chapter 21


The black boy whom Malbihn had left awaiting him in the clearing with
instructions to remain until he returned sat crouched at the foot of a
tree for an hour when he was suddenly startled by the coughing grunt of
a lion behind him.  With celerity born of the fear of death the boy
clambered into the branches of the tree, and a moment later the king of
beasts entered the clearing and approached the carcass of an antelope
which, until now, the boy had not seen.

Until daylight the beast fed, while the black clung, sleepless, to his
perch, wondering what had become of his master and the two ponies.  He
had been with Malbihn for a year, and so was fairly conversant with the
character of the white.  His knowledge presently led him to believe
that he had been purposely abandoned.  Like the balance of Malbihn's
followers, this boy hated his master cordially--fear being the only
bond that held him to the white man.  His present uncomfortable
predicament but added fuel to the fires of his hatred.

As the sun rose the lion withdrew into the jungle and the black
descended from his tree and started upon his long journey back to camp.
In his primitive brain revolved various fiendish plans for a revenge
that he would not have the courage to put into effect when the test
came and he stood face to face with one of the dominant race.

A mile from the clearing he came upon the spoor of two ponies crossing
his path at right angles.  A cunning look entered the black's eyes.  He
laughed uproariously and slapped his thighs.

Negroes are tireless gossipers, which, of course, is but a roundabout
way of saying that they are human.  Malbihn's boys had been no
exception to the rule and as many of them had been with him at various
times during the past ten years there was little about his acts and
life in the African wilds that was not known directly or by hearsay to
them all.

And so, knowing his master and many of his past deeds, knowing, too, a
great deal about the plans of Malbihn and Baynes that had been
overheard by himself, or other servants; and knowing well from the
gossip of the head-men that half of Malbihn's party lay in camp by the
great river far to the west, it was not difficult for the boy to put
two and two together and arrive at four as the sum--the four being
represented by a firm conviction that his master had deceived the other
white man and taken the latter's woman to his western camp, leaving the
other to suffer capture and punishment at the hands of the Big Bwana
whom all feared.  Again the boy bared his rows of big, white teeth and
laughed aloud.  Then he resumed his northward way, traveling at a
dogged trot that ate up the miles with marvelous rapidity.

In the Swede's camp the Hon. Morison had spent an almost sleepless
night of nervous apprehension and doubts and fears.  Toward morning he
had slept, utterly exhausted.  It was the headman who awoke him shortly
after sun rise to remind him that they must at once take up their
northward journey.  Baynes hung back.  He wanted to wait for "Hanson"
and Meriem.  The headman urged upon him the danger that lay in
loitering.  The fellow knew his master's plans sufficiently well to
understand that he had done something to arouse the ire of the Big
Bwana and that it would fare ill with them all if they were overtaken
in Big Bwana's country.  At the suggestion Baynes took alarm.

What if the Big Bwana, as the head-man called him, had surprised
"Hanson" in his nefarious work.  Would he not guess the truth and
possibly be already on the march to overtake and punish him?  Baynes
had heard much of his host's summary method of dealing out punishment
to malefactors great and small who transgressed the laws or customs of
his savage little world which lay beyond the outer ramparts of what men
are pleased to call frontiers.  In this savage world where there was no
law the Big Bwana was law unto himself and all who dwelt about him.  It
was even rumored that he had extracted the death penalty from a white
man who had maltreated a native girl.

Baynes shuddered at the recollection of this piece of gossip as he
wondered what his host would exact of the man who had attempted to
steal his young, white ward.  The thought brought him to his feet.

"Yes," he said, nervously, "we must get away from here at once.  Do you
know the trail to the north?"

The head-man did, and he lost no time in getting the safari upon the
march.

It was noon when a tired and sweat-covered runner overtook the trudging
little column.  The man was greeted with shouts of welcome from his
fellows, to whom he imparted all that he knew and guessed of the
actions of their master, so that the entire safari was aware of matters
before Baynes, who marched close to the head of the column, was reached
and acquainted with the facts and the imaginings of the black boy whom
Malbihn had deserted in the clearing the night before.

When the Hon. Morison had listened to all that the boy had to say and
realized that the trader had used him as a tool whereby he himself
might get Meriem into his possession, his blood ran hot with rage and
he trembled with apprehension for the girl's safety.

That another contemplated no worse a deed than he had contemplated in
no way palliated the hideousness of the other's offense.  At first it
did not occur to him that he would have wronged Meriem no less than he
believed "Hanson" contemplated wronging her.  Now his rage was more the
rage of a man beaten at his own game and robbed of the prize that he
had thought already his.

"Do you know where your master has gone?" he asked the black.

"Yes, Bwana," replied the boy.  "He has gone to the other camp beside
the big afi that flows far toward the setting sun.

"Can you take me to him?" demanded Baynes.

The boy nodded affirmatively.  Here he saw a method of revenging
himself upon his hated Bwana and at the same time of escaping the wrath
of the Big Bwana whom all were positive would first follow after the
northerly safari.

"Can you and I, alone, reach his camp?" asked the Hon. Morison.

"Yes, Bwana," assured the black.

Baynes turned toward the head-man.  He was conversant with "Hanson's"
plans now.  He understood why he had wished to move the northern camp
as far as possible toward the northern boundary of the Big Bwana's
country--it would give him far more time to make his escape toward the
West Coast while the Big Bwana was chasing the northern contingent.
Well, he would utilize the man's plans to his own end.  He, too, must
keep out of the clutches of his host.

"You may take the men north as fast as possible," he said to the
head-man.  "I shall return and attempt to lead the Big Bwana to the
west."

The Negro assented with a grunt.  He had no desire to follow this
strange white man who was afraid at night; he had less to remain at the
tender mercies of the Big Bwana's lusty warriors, between whom and his
people there was long-standing blood feud; and he was more than
delighted, into the bargain, for a legitimate excuse for deserting his
much hated Swede master.  He knew a way to the north and his own
country that the white men did not know--a short cut across an arid
plateau where lay water holes of which the white hunters and explorers
that had passed from time to time the fringe of the dry country had
never dreamed.  He might even elude the Big Bwana should he follow
them, and with this thought uppermost in his mind he gathered the
remnants of Malbihn's safari into a semblance of order and moved off
toward the north.  And toward the southwest the black boy led the Hon.
Morison Baynes into the jungles.

Korak had waited about the camp, watching the Hon. Morison until the
safari had started north.  Then, assured that the young Englishman was
going in the wrong direction to meet Meriem he had abandoned him and
returned slowly to the point where he had seen the girl, for whom his
heart yearned, in the arms of another.

So great had been his happiness at seeing Meriem alive that, for the
instant, no thought of jealousy had entered his mind.  Later these
thoughts had come--dark, bloody thoughts that would have made the flesh
of the Hon. Morison creep could he have guessed that they were
revolving in the brain of a savage creature creeping stealthily among
the branches of the forest giant beneath which he waited the coming of
"Hanson" and the girl.

And with passing of the hours had come subdued reflection in which he
had weighed himself against the trimly clad English gentleman
and--found that he was wanting.  What had he to offer her by comparison
with that which the other man might offer?  What was his "mess of
pottage" to the birthright that the other had preserved?  How could he
dare go, naked and unkempt, to that fair thing who had once been his
jungle-fellow and propose the thing that had been in his mind when
first the realization of his love had swept over him?  He shuddered as
he thought of the irreparable wrong that his love would have done the
innocent child but for the chance that had snatched her from him before
it was too late.  Doubtless she knew now the horror that had been in
his mind.  Doubtless she hated and loathed him as he hated and loathed
himself when he let his mind dwell upon it.  He had lost her.  No more
surely had she been lost when he thought her dead than she was in
reality now that he had seen her living--living in the guise of a
refinement that had transfigured and sanctified her.

He had loved her before, now he worshipped her.  He knew that he might
never possess her now, but at least he might see her.  From a distance
he might look upon her.  Perhaps he might serve her; but never must she
guess that he had found her or that he lived.

He wondered if she ever thought of him--if the happy days that they had
spent together never recurred to her mind.  It seemed unbelievable that
such could be the case, and yet, too, it seemed almost equally
unbelievable that this beautiful girl was the same disheveled, half
naked, little sprite who skipped nimbly among the branches of the trees
as they ran and played in the lazy, happy days of the past.  It could
not be that her memory held more of the past than did her new
appearance.

It was a sad Korak who ranged the jungle near the plain's edge waiting
for the coming of his Meriem--the Meriem who never came.

But there came another--a tall, broad-shouldered man in khaki at the
head of a swarthy crew of ebon warriors.  The man's face was set in
hard, stern lines and the marks of sorrow were writ deep about his
mouth and eyes--so deep that the set expression of rage upon his
features could not obliterate them.

Korak saw the man pass beneath him where he hid in the great tree that
had harbored him before upon the edge of that fateful little clearing.
He saw him come and he set rigid and frozen and suffering above him.
He saw him search the ground with his keen eyes, and he only sat there
watching with eyes that glazed from the intensity of his gaze.  He saw
him sign to his men that he had come upon that which he sought and he
saw him pass out of sight toward the north, and still Korak sat like a
graven image, with a heart that bled in dumb misery.  An hour later
Korak moved slowly away, back into the jungle toward the west.  He went
listlessly, with bent head and stooped shoulders, like an old man who
bore upon his back the weight of a great sorrow.

Baynes, following his black guide, battled his way through the dense
underbrush, riding stooped low over his horse's neck, or often he
dismounted where the low branches swept too close to earth to permit
him to remain in the saddle.  The black was taking him the shortest
way, which was no way at all for a horseman, and after the first day's
march the young Englishman was forced to abandon his mount, and follow
his nimble guide entirely on foot.

During the long hours of marching the Hon. Morison had much time to
devote to thought, and as he pictured the probable fate of Meriem at
the hands of the Swede his rage against the man became the greater.
But presently there came to him a realization of the fact that his own
base plans had led the girl into this terrible predicament, and that
even had she escaped "Hanson" she would have found but little better
deserts awaiting her with him.

There came too, the realization that Meriem was infinitely more
precious to him than he had imagined.  For the first time he commenced
to compare her with other women of his acquaintance--women of birth and
position--and almost to his surprise--he discovered that the young Arab
girl suffered less than they by the comparison.  And then from hating
"Hanson" he came to look upon himself with hate and loathing--to see
himself and his perfidious act in all their contemptible hideousness.

Thus, in the crucible of shame amidst the white heat of naked truths,
the passion that the man had felt for the girl he had considered his
social inferior was transmuted into love.  And as he staggered on there
burned within him beside his newborn love another great passion--the
passion of hate urging him on to the consummation of revenge.

A creature of ease and luxury, he had never been subjected to the
hardships and tortures which now were his constant companionship, yet,
his clothing torn, his flesh scratched and bleeding, he urged the black
to greater speed, though with every dozen steps he himself fell from
exhaustion.

It was revenge which kept him going--that and a feeling that in his
suffering he was partially expiating the great wrong he had done the
girl he loved--for hope of saving her from the fate into which he had
trapped her had never existed.  "Too late!  Too late!" was the dismal
accompaniment of thought to which he marched.  "Too late!  Too late to
save; but not too late to avenge!"  That kept him up.

Only when it became too dark to see would he permit of a halt.  A dozen
times in the afternoon he had threatened the black with instant death
when the tired guide insisted upon resting.  The fellow was terrified.
He could not understand the remarkable change that had so suddenly come
over the white man who had been afraid in the dark the night before.
He would have deserted this terrifying master had he had the
opportunity; but Baynes guessed that some such thought might be in the
other's mind, and so gave the fellow none.  He kept close to him by day
and slept touching him at night in the rude thorn boma they constructed
as a slight protection against prowling carnivora.

That the Hon. Morison could sleep at all in the midst of the savage
jungle was sufficient indication that he had changed considerably in
the past twenty-four hours, and that he could lie close beside a
none-too-fragrant black man spoke of possibilities for democracy within
him yet all undreamed of.

Morning found him stiff and lame and sore, but none the less determined
to push on in pursuit of "Hanson" as rapidly as possible.  With his
rifle he brought down a buck at a ford in a small stream shortly after
they broke camp, breakfastless.  Begrudgingly he permitted a halt while
they cooked and ate, and then on again through the wilderness of trees
and vines and underbrush.

And in the meantime Korak wandered slowly westward, coming upon the
trail of Tantor, the elephant, whom he overtook browsing in the deep
shade of the jungle.  The ape-man, lonely and sorrowing, was glad of
the companionship of his huge friend.  Affectionately the sinuous trunk
encircled him, and he was swung to the mighty back where so often
before he had lolled and dreamed the long afternoon away.

Far to the north the Big Bwana and his black warriors clung tenaciously
to the trail of the fleeing safari that was luring them further and
further from the girl they sought to save, while back at the bungalow
the woman who had loved Meriem as though she had been her own waited
impatiently and in sorrow for the return of the rescuing party and the
girl she was positive her invincible lord and master would bring back
with him.




Chapter 22


As Meriem struggled with Malbihn, her hands pinioned to her sides by
his brawny grip, hope died within her.  She did not utter a sound for
she knew that there was none to come to her assistance, and, too, the
jungle training of her earlier life had taught her the futility of
appeals for succor in the savage world of her up-bringing.

But as she fought to free herself one hand came in contact with the
butt of Malbihn's revolver where it rested in the holster at his hip.
Slowly he was dragging her toward the blankets, and slowly her fingers
encircled the coveted prize and drew it from its resting place.

Then, as Malbihn stood at the edge of the disordered pile of blankets,
Meriem suddenly ceased to draw away from him, and as quickly hurled her
weight against him with the result that he was thrown backward, his
feet stumbled against the bedding and he was hurled to his back.
Instinctively his hands flew out to save himself and at the same
instant Meriem leveled the revolver at his breast and pulled the
trigger.

But the hammer fell futilely upon an empty shell, and Malbihn was again
upon his feet clutching at her.  For a moment she eluded him, and ran
toward the entrance to the tent, but at the very doorway his heavy hand
fell upon her shoulder and dragged her back.  Wheeling upon him with
the fury of a wounded lioness Meriem grasped the long revolver by the
barrel, swung it high above her head and crashed it down full in
Malbihn's face.

With an oath of pain and rage the man staggered backward, releasing his
hold upon her and then sank unconscious to the ground.  Without a
backward look Meriem turned and fled into the open.  Several of the
blacks saw her and tried to intercept her flight, but the menace of the
empty weapon kept them at a distance.  And so she won beyond the
encircling boma and disappeared into the jungle to the south.

Straight into the branches of a tree she went, true to the arboreal
instincts of the little mangani she had been, and here she stripped off
her riding skirt, her shoes and her stockings, for she knew that she
had before her a journey and a flight which would not brook the burden
of these garments.  Her riding breeches and jacket would have to serve
as protection from cold and thorns, nor would they hamper her over
much; but a skirt and shoes were impossible among the trees.

She had not gone far before she commenced to realize how slight were
her chances for survival without means of defense or a weapon to bring
down meat.  Why had she not thought to strip the cartridge belt from
Malbihn's waist before she had left his tent!  With cartridges for the
revolver she might hope to bag small game, and to protect herself from
all but the most ferocious of the enemies that would beset her way back
to the beloved hearthstone of Bwana and My Dear.

With the thought came determination to return and obtain the coveted
ammunition.  She realized that she was taking great chances of
recapture; but without means of defense and of obtaining meat she felt
that she could never hope to reach safety.  And so she turned her face
back toward the camp from which she had but just escaped.

She thought Malbihn dead, so terrific a blow had she dealt him, and she
hoped to find an opportunity after dark to enter the camp and search
his tent for the cartridge belt; but scarcely had she found a hiding
place in a great tree at the edge of the boma where she could watch
without danger of being discovered, when she saw the Swede emerge from
his tent, wiping blood from his face, and hurling a volley of oaths and
questions at his terrified followers.

Shortly after the entire camp set forth in search of her and when
Meriem was positive that all were gone she descended from her hiding
place and ran quickly across the clearing to Malbihn's tent.  A hasty
survey of the interior revealed no ammunition; but in one corner was a
box in which were packed the Swede's personal belongings that he had
sent along by his headman to this westerly camp.

Meriem seized the receptacle as the possible container of extra
ammunition.  Quickly she loosed the cords that held the canvas covering
about the box, and a moment later had raised the lid and was rummaging
through the heterogeneous accumulation of odds and ends within.  There
were letters and papers and cuttings from old newspapers, and among
other things the photograph of a little girl upon the back of which was
pasted a cutting from a Paris daily--a cutting that she could not read,
yellowed and dimmed by age and handling--but something about the
photograph of the little girl which was also reproduced in the
newspaper cutting held her attention.  Where had she seen that picture
before?  And then, quite suddenly, it came to her that this was a
picture of herself as she had been years and years before.

Where had it been taken?  How had it come into the possession of this
man?  Why had it been reproduced in a newspaper?  What was the story
that the faded type told of it?

Meriem was baffled by the puzzle that her search for ammunition had
revealed.  She stood gazing at the faded photograph for a time and then
bethought herself of the ammunition for which she had come.  Turning
again to the box she rummaged to the bottom and there in a corner she
came upon a little box of cartridges.  A single glance assured her that
they were intended for the weapon she had thrust inside the band of her
riding breeches, and slipping them into her pocket she turned once more
for an examination of the baffling likeness of herself that she held in
her hand.

As she stood thus in vain endeavor to fathom this inexplicable mystery
the sound of voices broke upon her ears.  Instantly she was all alert.
They were coming closer!  A second later she recognized the lurid
profanity of the Swede.  Malbihn, her persecutor, was returning!
Meriem ran quickly to the opening of the tent and looked out.  It was
too late!  She was fairly cornered!  The white man and three of his
black henchmen were coming straight across the clearing toward the
tent.  What was she to do?  She slipped the photograph into her waist.
Quickly she slipped a cartridge into each of the chambers of the
revolver.  Then she backed toward the end of the tent, keeping the
entrance covered by her weapon.  The man stopped outside, and Meriem
could hear Malbihn profanely issuing instructions.  He was a long time
about it, and while he talked in his bellowing, brutish voice, the girl
sought some avenue of escape.  Stooping, she raised the bottom of the
canvas and looked beneath and beyond.  There was no one in sight upon
that side.  Throwing herself upon her stomach she wormed beneath the
tent wall just as Malbihn, with a final word to his men, entered the
tent.

Meriem heard him cross the floor, and then she rose and, stooping low,
ran to a native hut directly behind.  Once inside this she turned and
glanced back.  There was no one in sight.  She had not been seen.  And
now from Malbihn's tent she heard a great cursing.  The Swede had
discovered the rifling of his box.  He was shouting to his men, and as
she heard them reply Meriem darted from the hut and ran toward the edge
of the boma furthest from Malbihn's tent.  Overhanging the boma at this
point was a tree that had been too large, in the eyes of the
rest-loving blacks, to cut down.  So they had terminated the boma just
short of it.  Meriem was thankful for whatever circumstance had
resulted in the leaving of that particular tree where it was, since it
gave her the much-needed avenue of escape which she might not otherwise
have had.

From her hiding place she saw Malbihn again enter the jungle, this time
leaving a guard of three of his boys in the camp.  He went toward the
south, and after he had disappeared, Meriem skirted the outside of the
enclosure and made her way to the river.  Here lay the canoes that had
been used in bringing the party from the opposite shore.  They were
unwieldy things for a lone girl to handle, but there was no other way
and she must cross the river.

The landing place was in full view of the guard at the camp.  To risk
the crossing under their eyes would have meant undoubted capture.  Her
only hope lay in waiting until darkness had fallen, unless some
fortuitous circumstance should arise before.  For an hour she lay
watching the guard, one of whom seemed always in a position where he
would immediately discover her should she attempt to launch one of the
canoes.

Presently Malbihn appeared, coming out of the jungle, hot and puffing.
He ran immediately to the river where the canoes lay and counted them.
It was evident that it had suddenly occurred to him that the girl must
cross here if she wished to return to her protectors.  The expression
of relief on his face when he found that none of the canoes was gone
was ample evidence of what was passing in his mind.  He turned and
spoke hurriedly to the head man who had followed him out of the jungle
and with whom were several other blacks.

Following Malbihn's instructions they launched all the canoes but one.
Malbihn called to the guards in the camp and a moment later the entire
party had entered the boats and were paddling up stream.

Meriem watched them until a bend in the river directly above the camp
hid them from her sight.  They were gone!  She was alone, and they had
left a canoe in which lay a paddle!  She could scarce believe the good
fortune that had come to her.  To delay now would be suicidal to her
hopes.  Quickly she ran from her hiding place and dropped to the
ground.  A dozen yards lay between her and the canoe.

Up stream, beyond the bend, Malbihn ordered his canoes in to shore.  He
landed with his head man and crossed the little point slowly in search
of a spot where he might watch the canoe he had left at the landing
place.  He was smiling in anticipation of the almost certain success of
his stratagem--sooner or later the girl would come back and attempt to
cross the river in one of their canoes.  It might be that the idea
would not occur to her for some time.  They might have to wait a day,
or two days; but that she would come if she lived or was not captured
by the men he had scouting the jungle for her Malbihn was sure.  That
she would come so soon, however, he had not guessed, and so when he
topped the point and came again within sight of the river he saw that
which drew an angry oath from his lips--his quarry already was half way
across the river.

Turning, he ran rapidly back to his boats, the head man at his heels.
Throwing themselves in, Malbihn urged his paddlers to their most
powerful efforts.  The canoes shot out into the stream and down with
the current toward the fleeing quarry.  She had almost completed the
crossing when they came in sight of her.  At the same instant she saw
them, and redoubled her efforts to reach the opposite shore before they
should overtake her.  Two minutes' start of them was all Meriem cared
for.  Once in the trees she knew that she could outdistance and elude
them.  Her hopes were high--they could not overtake her now--she had
had too good a start of them.

Malbihn, urging his men onward with a stream of hideous oaths and blows
from his fists, realized that the girl was again slipping from his
clutches.  The leading canoe, in the bow of which he stood, was yet a
hundred yards behind the fleeing Meriem when she ran the point of her
craft beneath the overhanging trees on the shore of safety.

Malbihn screamed to her to halt.  He seemed to have gone mad with rage
at the realization that he could not overtake her, and then he threw
his rifle to his shoulder, aimed carefully at the slim figure
scrambling into the trees, and fired.

Malbihn was an excellent shot.  His misses at so short a distance were
practically non-existent, nor would he have missed this time but for an
accident occurring at the very instant that his finger tightened upon
the trigger--an accident to which Meriem owed her life--the
providential presence of a water-logged tree trunk, one end of which
was embedded in the mud of the river bottom and the other end of which
floated just beneath the surface where the prow of Malbihn's canoe ran
upon it as he fired.  The slight deviation of the boat's direction was
sufficient to throw the muzzle of the rifle out of aim.  The bullet
whizzed harmlessly by Meriem's head and an instant later she had
disappeared into the foliage of the tree.

There was a smile on her lips as she dropped to the ground to cross a
little clearing where once had stood a native village surrounded by its
fields.  The ruined huts still stood in crumbling decay.  The rank
vegetation of the jungle overgrew the cultivated ground.  Small trees
already had sprung up in what had been the village street; but
desolation and loneliness hung like a pall above the scene.  To Meriem,
however, it presented but a place denuded of large trees which she must
cross quickly to regain the jungle upon the opposite side before
Malbihn should have landed.

The deserted huts were, to her, all the better because they were
deserted--she did not see the keen eyes watching her from a dozen
points, from tumbling doorways, from behind tottering granaries.  In
utter unconsciousness of impending danger she started up the village
street because it offered the clearest pathway to the jungle.

A mile away toward the east, fighting his way through the jungle along
the trail taken by Malbihn when he had brought Meriem to his camp, a
man in torn khaki--filthy, haggard, unkempt--came to a sudden stop as
the report of Malbihn's rifle resounded faintly through the tangled
forest.  The black man just ahead of him stopped, too.

"We are almost there, Bwana," he said.  There was awe and respect in
his tone and manner.

The white man nodded and motioned his ebon guide forward once more.  It
was the Hon. Morison Baynes--the fastidious--the exquisite.  His face
and hands were scratched and smeared with dried blood from the wounds
he had come by in thorn and thicket.  His clothes were tatters.  But
through the blood and the dirt and the rags a new Baynes shone forth--a
handsomer Baynes than the dandy and the fop of yore.

In the heart and soul of every son of woman lies the germ of manhood
and honor.  Remorse for a scurvy act, and an honorable desire to right
the wrong he had done the woman he now knew he really loved had excited
these germs to rapid growth in Morison Baynes--and the metamorphosis
had taken place.

Onward the two stumbled toward the point from which the single rifle
shot had come.  The black was unarmed--Baynes, fearing his loyalty had
not dared trust him even to carry the rifle which the white man would
have been glad to be relieved of many times upon the long march; but
now that they were approaching their goal, and knowing as he did that
hatred of Malbihn burned hot in the black man's brain, Baynes handed
him the rifle, for he guessed that there would be fighting--he intended
that there should, for he had come to avenge.  Himself, an excellent
revolver shot, would depend upon the smaller weapon at his side.

As the two forged ahead toward their goal they were startled by a
volley of shots ahead of them.  Then came a few scattering reports,
some savage yells, and silence.  Baynes was frantic in his endeavors to
advance more rapidly, but there the jungle seemed a thousand times more
tangled than before.  A dozen times he tripped and fell.  Twice the
black followed a blind trail and they were forced to retrace their
steps; but at last they came out into a little clearing near the big
afi--a clearing that once held a thriving village, but lay somber and
desolate in decay and ruin.

In the jungle vegetation that overgrew what had once been the main
village street lay the body of a black man, pierced through the heart
with a bullet, and still warm.  Baynes and his companion looked about
in all directions; but no sign of living being could they discover.
They stood in silence listening intently.

What was that!  Voices and the dip of paddles out upon the river?

Baynes ran across the dead village toward the fringe of jungle upon the
river's brim.  The black was at his side.  Together they forced their
way through the screening foliage until they could obtain a view of the
river, and there, almost to the other shore, they saw Malbihn's canoes
making rapidly for camp.  The black recognized his companions
immediately.

"How can we cross?" asked Baynes.

The black shook his head.  There was no canoe and the crocodiles made
it equivalent to suicide to enter the water in an attempt to swim
across.  Just then the fellow chanced to glance downward.  Beneath him,
wedged among the branches of a tree, lay the canoe in which Meriem had
escaped.  The Negro grasped Baynes' arm and pointed toward his find.
The Hon. Morison could scarce repress a shout of exultation.  Quickly
the two slid down the drooping branches into the boat.  The black
seized the paddle and Baynes shoved them out from beneath the tree.  A
second later the canoe shot out upon the bosom of the river and headed
toward the opposite shore and the camp of the Swede.  Baynes squatted
in the bow, straining his eyes after the men pulling the other canoes
upon the bank across from him.  He saw Malbihn step from the bow of the
foremost of the little craft.  He saw him turn and glance back across
the river.  He could see his start of surprise as his eyes fell upon
the pursuing canoe, and called the attention of his followers to it.

Then he stood waiting, for there was but one canoe and two men--little
danger to him and his followers in that.  Malbihn was puzzled.  Who was
this white man?  He did not recognize him though Baynes' canoe was now
in mid stream and the features of both its occupants plainly
discernible to those on shore.  One of Malbihn's blacks it was who
first recognized his fellow black in the person of Baynes' companion.
Then Malbihn guessed who the white man must be, though he could scarce
believe his own reasoning.  It seemed beyond the pale of wildest
conjecture to suppose that the Hon.  Morison Baynes had followed him
through the jungle with but a single companion--and yet it was true.
Beneath the dirt and dishevelment he recognized him at last, and in the
necessity of admitting that it was he, Malbihn was forced to recognize
the incentive that had driven Baynes, the weakling and coward, through
the savage jungle upon his trail.

The man had come to demand an accounting and to avenge.  It seemed
incredible, and yet there could be no other explanation.  Malbihn
shrugged.  Well, others had sought Malbihn for similar reasons in the
course of a long and checkered career.  He fingered his rifle, and
waited.

Now the canoe was within easy speaking distance of the shore.

"What do you want?" yelled Malbihn, raising his weapon threateningly.

The Hon. Morison Baynes leaped to his feet.

"You, damn you!" he shouted, whipping out his revolver and firing
almost simultaneously with the Swede.

As the two reports rang out Malbihn dropped his rifle, clutched
frantically at his breast, staggered, fell first to his knees and then
lunged upon his face.  Baynes stiffened.  His head flew back
spasmodically.  For an instant he stood thus, and then crumpled very
gently into the bottom of the boat.

The black paddler was at a loss as to what to do.  If Malbihn really
were dead he could continue on to join his fellows without fear; but
should the Swede only be wounded he would be safer upon the far shore.
Therefore he hesitated, holding the canoe in mid stream.  He had come
to have considerable respect for his new master and was not unmoved by
his death.  As he sat gazing at the crumpled body in the bow of the
boat he saw it move.  Very feebly the man essayed to turn over.  He
still lived.  The black moved forward and lifted him to a sitting
position.  He was standing in front of him, his paddle in one hand,
asking Baynes where he was hit when there was another shot from shore
and the Negro pitched head-long overboard, his paddle still clutched in
his dead fingers--shot through the forehead.

Baynes turned weakly in the direction of the shore to see Malbihn drawn
up upon his elbows levelling his rifle at him.  The Englishman slid to
the bottom of the canoe as a bullet whizzed above him.  Malbihn, sore
hit, took longer in aiming, nor was his aim as sure as formerly.  With
difficulty Baynes turned himself over on his belly and grasping his
revolver in his right hand drew himself up until he could look over the
edge of the canoe.

Malbihn saw him instantly and fired; but Baynes did not flinch or duck.
With painstaking care he aimed at the target upon the shore from which
he now was drifting with the current.  His finger closed upon the
trigger--there was a flash and a report, and Malbihn's giant frame
jerked to the impact of another bullet.

But he was not yet dead.  Again he aimed and fired, the bullet
splintering the gunwale of the canoe close by Baynes' face.  Baynes
fired again as his canoe drifted further down stream and Malbihn
answered from the shore where he lay in a pool of his own blood.  And
thus, doggedly, the two wounded men continued to carry on their weird
duel until the winding African river had carried the Hon.  Morison
Baynes out of sight around a wooded point.




Chapter 23


Meriem had traversed half the length of the village street when a score
of white-robed Negroes and half-castes leaped out upon her from the
dark interiors of surrounding huts.  She turned to flee, but heavy
hands seized her, and when she turned at last to plead with them her
eyes fell upon the face of a tall, grim, old man glaring down upon her
from beneath the folds of his burnous.

At sight of him she staggered back in shocked and terrified surprise.
It was The Sheik!

Instantly all the old fears and terrors of her childhood returned upon
her.  She stood trembling before this horrible old man, as a murderer
before the judge about to pass sentence of death upon him.  She knew
that The Sheik recognized her.  The years and the changed raiment had
not altered her so much but what one who had known her features so well
in childhood would know her now.

"So you have come back to your people, eh?" snarled The Sheik.  "Come
back begging for food and protection, eh?"

"Let me go," cried the girl.  "I ask nothing of you, but that you let
me go back to the Big Bwana."

"The Big Bwana?" almost screamed The Sheik, and then followed a stream
of profane, Arabic invective against the white man whom all the
transgressors of the jungle feared and hated.  "You would go back to
the Big Bwana, would you?  So that is where you have been since you ran
away from me, is it?  And who comes now across the river after you--the
Big Bwana?"

"The Swede whom you once chased away from your country when he and his
companion conspired with Nbeeda to steal me from you," replied Meriem.

The Sheik's eyes blazed, and he called his men to approach the shore
and hide among the bushes that they might ambush and annihilate Malbihn
and his party; but Malbihn already had landed and crawling through the
fringe of jungle was at that very moment looking with wide and
incredulous eyes upon the scene being enacted in the street of the
deserted village.  He recognized The Sheik the moment his eyes fell
upon him.  There were two men in the world that Malbihn feared as he
feared the devil.  One was the Big Bwana and the other The Sheik.  A
single glance he took at that gaunt, familiar figure and then he turned
tail and scurried back to his canoe calling his followers after him.
And so it happened that the party was well out in the stream before The
Sheik reached the shore, and after a volley and a few parting shots
that were returned from the canoes the Arab called his men off and
securing his prisoner set off toward the South.

One of the bullets from Malbihn's force had struck a black standing in
the village street where he had been left with another to guard Meriem,
and his companions had left him where he had fallen, after
appropriating his apparel and belongings.  His was the body that Baynes
had discovered when he had entered the village.

The Sheik and his party had been marching southward along the river
when one of them, dropping out of line to fetch water, had seen Meriem
paddling desperately from the opposite shore.  The fellow had called
The Sheik's attention to the strange sight--a white woman alone in
Central Africa and the old Arab had hidden his men in the deserted
village to capture her when she landed, for thoughts of ransom were
always in the mind of The Sheik.  More than once before had glittering
gold filtered through his fingers from a similar source.  It was easy
money and The Sheik had none too much easy money since the Big Bwana
had so circumscribed the limits of his ancient domain that he dared not
even steal ivory from natives within two hundred miles of the Big
Bwana's douar.  And when at last the woman had walked into the trap he
had set for her and he had recognized her as the same little girl he
had brutalized and mal-treated years before his gratification had been
huge.  Now he lost no time in establishing the old relations of father
and daughter that had existed between them in the past.  At the first
opportunity he struck her a heavy blow across the face.  He forced her
to walk when he might have dismounted one of his men instead, or had
her carried on a horse's rump.  He seemed to revel in the discovery of
new methods for torturing or humiliating her, and among all his
followers she found no single one to offer her sympathy, or who dared
defend her, even had they had the desire to do so.

A two days' march brought them at last to the familiar scenes of her
childhood, and the first face upon which she set her eyes as she was
driven through the gates into the strong stockade was that of the
toothless, hideous Mabunu, her one time nurse.  It was as though all
the years that had intervened were but a dream.  Had it not been for
her clothing and the fact that she had grown in stature she might well
have believed it so.  All was there as she had left it--the new faces
which supplanted some of the old were of the same bestial, degraded
type.  There were a few young Arabs who had joined The Sheik since she
had been away.  Otherwise all was the same--all but one.  Geeka was not
there, and she found herself missing Geeka as though the ivory-headed
one had been a flesh and blood intimate and friend.  She missed her
ragged little confidante, into whose deaf ears she had been wont to
pour her many miseries and her occasional joys--Geeka, of the splinter
limbs and the ratskin torso--Geeka the disreputable--Geeka the beloved.

For a time the inhabitants of The Sheik's village who had not been upon
the march with him amused themselves by inspecting the strangely clad
white girl, whom some of them had known as a little child.  Mabunu
pretended great joy at her return, baring her toothless gums in a
hideous grimace that was intended to be indicative of rejoicing.  But
Meriem could but shudder as she recalled the cruelties of this terrible
old hag in the years gone by.

Among the Arabs who had come in her absence was a tall young fellow of
twenty--a handsome, sinister looking youth--who stared at her in open
admiration until The Sheik came and ordered him away, and Abdul Kamak
went, scowling.

At last, their curiosity satisfied, Meriem was alone.  As of old, she
was permitted the freedom of the village, for the stockade was high and
strong and the only gates were well-guarded by day and by night; but as
of old she cared not for the companionship of the cruel Arabs and the
degraded blacks who formed the following of The Sheik, and so, as had
been her wont in the sad days of her childhood, she slunk down to an
unfrequented corner of the enclosure where she had often played at
house-keeping with her beloved Geeka beneath the spreading branches of
the great tree that had overhung the palisade; but now the tree was
gone, and Meriem guessed the reason.  It was from this tree that Korak
had descended and struck down The Sheik the day that he had rescued her
from the life of misery and torture that had been her lot for so long
that she could remember no other.

There were low bushes growing within the stockade, however, and in the
shade of these Meriem sat down to think.  A little glow of happiness
warmed her heart as she recalled her first meeting with Korak and then
the long years that he had cared for and protected her with the
solicitude and purity of an elder brother.  For months Korak had not so
occupied her thoughts as he did today.  He seemed closer and dearer now
than ever he had before, and she wondered that her heart had drifted so
far from loyalty to his memory.  And then came the image of the Hon.
Morison, the exquisite, and Meriem was troubled.  Did she really love
the flawless young Englishman?  She thought of the glories of London,
of which he had told her in such glowing language.  She tried to
picture herself admired and honored in the midst of the gayest society
of the great capital.  The pictures she drew were the pictures that the
Hon. Morison had drawn for her.  They were alluring pictures, but
through them all the brawny, half-naked figure of the giant Adonis of
the jungle persisted in obtruding itself.

Meriem pressed her hand above her heart as she stifled a sigh, and as
she did so she felt the hard outlines of the photograph she had hidden
there as she slunk from Malbihn's tent.  Now she drew it forth and
commenced to re-examine it more carefully than she had had time to do
before.  She was sure that the baby face was hers.  She studied every
detail of the picture.  Half hidden in the lace of the dainty dress
rested a chain and locket.  Meriem puckered her brows.  What
tantalizing half-memories it awakened!  Could this flower of evident
civilization be the little Arab Meriem, daughter of The Sheik?  It was
impossible, and yet that locket?  Meriem knew it.  She could not refute
the conviction of her memory.  She had seen that locket before and it
had been hers.  What strange mystery lay buried in her past?

As she sat gazing at the picture she suddenly became aware that she was
not alone--that someone was standing close behind her--some one who had
approached her noiselessly.  Guiltily she thrust the picture back into
her waist.  A hand fell upon her shoulder.  She was sure that it was
The Sheik and she awaited in dumb terror the blow that she knew would
follow.

No blow came and she looked upward over her shoulder--into the eyes of
Abdul Kamak, the young Arab.

"I saw," he said, "the picture that you have just hidden.  It is you
when you were a child--a very young child.  May I see it again?"

Meriem drew away from him.

"I will give it back," he said.  "I have heard of you and I know that
you have no love for The Sheik, your father.  Neither have I.  I will
not betray you.  Let me see the picture."

Friendless among cruel enemies, Meriem clutched at the straw that Abdul
Kamak held out to her.  Perhaps in him she might find the friend she
needed.  Anyway he had seen the picture and if he was not a friend he
could tell The Sheik about it and it would be taken away from her.  So
she might as well grant his request and hope that he had spoken fairly,
and would deal fairly.  She drew the photograph from its hiding place
and handed it to him.

Abdul Kamak examined it carefully, comparing it, feature by feature
with the girl sitting on the ground looking up into his face.  Slowly
he nodded his head.

"Yes," he said, "it is you, but where was it taken?  How does it happen
that The Sheik's daughter is clothed in the garments of the unbeliever?"

"I do not know," replied Meriem.  "I never saw the picture until a
couple of days ago, when I found it in the tent of the Swede, Malbihn."

Abdul Kamak raised his eyebrows.  He turned the picture over and as his
eyes fell upon the old newspaper cutting they went wide.  He could read
French, with difficulty, it is true; but he could read it.  He had been
to Paris.  He had spent six months there with a troupe of his desert
fellows, upon exhibition, and he had improved his time, learning many
of the customs, some of the language, and most of the vices of his
conquerors.  Now he put his learning to use.  Slowly, laboriously he
read the yellowed cutting.  His eyes were no longer wide.  Instead they
narrowed to two slits of cunning.  When he had done he looked at the
girl.

"You have read this?" he asked.

"It is French," she replied, "and I do not read French."

Abdul Kamak stood long in silence looking at the girl.  She was very
beautiful.  He desired her, as had many other men who had seen her.  At
last he dropped to one knee beside her.

A wonderful idea had sprung to Abdul Kamak's mind.  It was an idea that
might be furthered if the girl were kept in ignorance of the contents
of that newspaper cutting.  It would certainly be doomed should she
learn its contents.

"Meriem," he whispered, "never until today have my eyes beheld you, yet
at once they told my heart that it must ever be your servant.  You do
not know me, but I ask that you trust me.  I can help you.  You hate
The Sheik--so do I.  Let me take you away from him.  Come with me, and
we will go back to the great desert where my father is a sheik mightier
than is yours.  Will you come?"

Meriem sat in silence.  She hated to wound the only one who had offered
her protection and friendship; but she did not want Abdul Kamak's love.
Deceived by her silence the man seized her and strained her to him; but
Meriem struggled to free herself.

"I do not love you," she cried.  "Oh, please do not make me hate you.
You are the only one who has shown kindness toward me, and I want to
like you, but I cannot love you."

Abdul Kamak drew himself to his full height.

"You will learn to love me," he said, "for I shall take you whether you
will or no.  You hate The Sheik and so you will not tell him, for if
you do I will tell him of the picture.  I hate The Sheik, and--"

"You hate The Sheik?" came a grim voice from behind them.

Both turned to see The Sheik standing a few paces from them.  Abdul
still held the picture in his hand.  Now he thrust it within his
burnous.

"Yes," he said, "I hate the Sheik," and as he spoke he sprang toward
the older man, felled him with a blow and dashed on across the village
to the line where his horse was picketed, saddled and ready, for Abdul
Kamak had been about to ride forth to hunt when he had seen the
stranger girl alone by the bushes.

Leaping into the saddle Abdul Kamak dashed for the village gates.  The
Sheik, momentarily stunned by the blow that had felled him, now
staggered to his feet, shouting lustily to his followers to stop the
escaped Arab.  A dozen blacks leaped forward to intercept the horseman,
only to be ridden down or brushed aside by the muzzle of Abdul Kamak's
long musket, which he lashed from side to side about him as he spurred
on toward the gate.  But here he must surely be intercepted.  Already
the two blacks stationed there were pushing the unwieldy portals to.
Up flew the barrel of the fugitive's weapon.  With reins flying loose
and his horse at a mad gallop the son of the desert fired once--twice;
and both the keepers of the gate dropped in their tracks.  With a wild
whoop of exultation, twirling his musket high above his head and
turning in his saddle to laugh back into the faces of his pursuers
Abdul Kamak dashed out of the village of The Sheik and was swallowed up
by the jungle.

Foaming with rage The Sheik ordered immediate pursuit, and then strode
rapidly back to where Meriem sat huddled by the bushes where he had
left her.

"The picture!" he cried.  "What picture did the dog speak of?  Where is
it?  Give it to me at once!"

"He took it," replied Meriem, dully.

"What was it?" again demanded The Sheik, seizing the girl roughly by
the hair and dragging her to her feet, where he shook her venomously.
"What was it a picture of?"

"Of me," said Meriem, "when I was a little girl.  I stole it from
Malbihn, the Swede--it had printing on the back cut from an old
newspaper."

The Sheik went white with rage.

"What said the printing?" he asked in a voice so low that she but
barely caught his words.

"I do not know.  It was in French and I cannot read French."

The Sheik seemed relieved.  He almost smiled, nor did he again strike
Meriem before he turned and strode away with the parting admonition
that she speak never again to any other than Mabunu and himself.  And
along the caravan trail galloped Abdul Kamak toward the north.


As his canoe drifted out of sight and range of the wounded Swede the
Hon. Morison sank weakly to its bottom where he lay for long hours in
partial stupor.

It was night before he fully regained consciousness.  And then he lay
for a long time looking up at the stars and trying to recollect where
he was, what accounted for the gently rocking motion of the thing upon
which he lay, and why the position of the stars changed so rapidly and
miraculously.  For a while he thought he was dreaming, but when he
would have moved to shake sleep from him the pain of his wound recalled
to him the events that had led up to his present position.  Then it was
that he realized that he was floating down a great African river in a
native canoe--alone, wounded, and lost.

Painfully he dragged himself to a sitting position.  He noticed that
the wound pained him less than he had imagined it would.  He felt of it
gingerly--it had ceased to bleed.  Possibly it was but a flesh wound
after all, and nothing serious.  If it totally incapacitated him even
for a few days it would mean death, for by that time he would be too
weakened by hunger and pain to provide food for himself.

From his own troubles his mind turned to Meriem's.  That she had been
with the Swede at the time he had attempted to reach the fellow's camp
he naturally believed; but he wondered what would become of her now.
Even if Hanson died of his wounds would Meriem be any better off?  She
was in the power of equally villainous men--brutal savages of the
lowest order.  Baynes buried his face in his hands and rocked back and
forth as the hideous picture of her fate burned itself into his
consciousness.  And it was he who had brought this fate upon her!  His
wicked desire had snatched a pure and innocent girl from the protection
of those who loved her to hurl her into the clutches of the bestial
Swede and his outcast following!  And not until it had become too late
had he realized the magnitude of the crime he himself had planned and
contemplated.  Not until it had become too late had he realized that
greater than his desire, greater than his lust, greater than any
passion he had ever felt before was the newborn love that burned within
his breast for the girl he would have ruined.

The Hon. Morison Baynes did not fully realize the change that had taken
place within him.  Had one suggested that he ever had been aught than
the soul of honor and chivalry he would have taken umbrage forthwith.
He knew that he had done a vile thing when he had plotted to carry
Meriem away to London, yet he excused it on the ground of his great
passion for the girl having temporarily warped his moral standards by
the intensity of its heat.  But, as a matter of fact, a new Baynes had
been born.  Never again could this man be bent to dishonor by the
intensity of a desire.  His moral fiber had been strengthened by the
mental suffering he had endured.  His mind and his soul had been purged
by sorrow and remorse.

His one thought now was to atone--win to Meriem's side and lay down his
life, if necessary, in her protection.  His eyes sought the length of
the canoe in search of the paddle, for a determination had galvanized
him to immediate action despite his weakness and his wound.  But the
paddle was gone.  He turned his eyes toward the shore.  Dimly through
the darkness of a moonless night he saw the awful blackness of the
jungle, yet it touched no responsive chord of terror within him now as
it had done in the past.  He did not even wonder that he was unafraid,
for his mind was entirely occupied with thoughts of another's danger.

Drawing himself to his knees he leaned over the edge of the canoe and
commenced to paddle vigorously with his open palm.  Though it tired and
hurt him he kept assiduously at his self imposed labor for hours.
Little by little the drifting canoe moved nearer and nearer the shore.
The Hon. Morison could hear a lion roaring directly opposite him and so
close that he felt he must be almost to the shore.  He drew his rifle
closer to his side; but he did not cease to paddle.

After what seemed to the tired man an eternity of time he felt the
brush of branches against the canoe and heard the swirl of the water
about them.  A moment later he reached out and clutched a leafy limb.
Again the lion roared--very near it seemed now, and Baynes wondered if
the brute could have been following along the shore waiting for him to
land.

He tested the strength of the limb to which he clung.  It seemed strong
enough to support a dozen men.  Then he reached down and lifted his
rifle from the bottom of the canoe, slipping the sling over his
shoulder.  Again he tested the branch, and then reaching upward as far
as he could for a safe hold he drew himself painfully and slowly upward
until his feet swung clear of the canoe, which, released, floated
silently from beneath him to be lost forever in the blackness of the
dark shadows down stream.

He had burned his bridges behind him.  He must either climb aloft or
drop back into the river; but there had been no other way.  He
struggled to raise one leg over the limb, but found himself scarce
equal to the effort, for he was very weak.  For a time he hung there
feeling his strength ebbing.  He knew that he must gain the branch
above at once or it would be too late.

Suddenly the lion roared almost in his ear.  Baynes glanced up.  He saw
two spots of flame a short distance from and above him.  The lion was
standing on the bank of the river glaring at him, and--waiting for him.
Well, thought the Hon. Morison, let him wait.  Lions can't climb trees,
and if I get into this one I shall be safe enough from him.

The young Englishman's feet hung almost to the surface of the
water--closer than he knew, for all was pitch dark below as above him.
Presently he heard a slight commotion in the river beneath him and
something banged against one of his feet, followed almost instantly by
a sound that he felt he could not have mistaken--the click of great
jaws snapping together.

"By George!" exclaimed the Hon. Morison, aloud.  "The beggar nearly got
me," and immediately he struggled again to climb higher and to
comparative safety; but with that final effort he knew that it was
futile.  Hope that had survived persistently until now began to wane.
He felt his tired, numbed fingers slipping from their hold--he was
dropping back into the river--into the jaws of the frightful death that
awaited him there.

And then he heard the leaves above him rustle to the movement of a
creature among them.  The branch to which he clung bent beneath an
added weight--and no light weight, from the way it sagged; but still
Baynes clung desperately--he would not give up voluntarily either to
the death above or the death below.

He felt a soft, warm pad upon the fingers of one of his hands where
they circled the branch to which he clung, and then something reached
down out of the blackness above and dragged him up among the branches
of the tree.




Chapter 24


Sometimes lolling upon Tantor's back, sometimes roaming the jungle in
solitude, Korak made his way slowly toward the West and South.  He made
but a few miles a day, for he had a whole lifetime before him and no
place in particular to go. Possibly he would have moved more rapidly
but for the thought which continually haunted him that each mile he
traversed carried him further and further away from Meriem--no longer
his Meriem, as of yore, it is true! but still as dear to him as ever.

Thus he came upon the trail of The Sheik's band as it traveled down
river from the point where The Sheik had captured Meriem to his own
stockaded village.  Korak pretty well knew who it was that had passed,
for there were few in the great jungle with whom he was not familiar,
though it had been years since he had come this far north.  He had no
particular business, however, with the old Sheik and so he did not
propose following him--the further from men he could stay the better
pleased he would be--he wished that he might never see a human face
again.  Men always brought him sorrow and misery.

The river suggested fishing and so he dawdled upon its shores, catching
fish after a fashion of his own devising and eating them raw.  When
night came he curled up in a great tree beside the stream--the one from
which he had been fishing during the afternoon--and was soon asleep.
Numa, roaring beneath him, awoke him.  He was about to call out in
anger to his noisy neighbor when something else caught his attention.
He listened.  Was there something in the tree beside himself?  Yes, he
heard the noise of something below him trying to clamber upward.
Presently he heard the click of a crocodile's jaws in the waters
beneath, and then, low but distinct: "By George!  The beggar nearly got
me."  The voice was familiar.

Korak glanced downward toward the speaker.  Outlined against the faint
luminosity of the water he saw the figure of a man clinging to a lower
branch of the tree.  Silently and swiftly the ape-man clambered
downward.  He felt a hand beneath his foot.  He reached down and
clutched the figure beneath him and dragged it up among the branches.
It struggled weakly and struck at him; but Korak paid no more attention
than Tantor to an ant.  He lugged his burden to the higher safety and
greater comfort of a broad crotch, and there he propped it in a sitting
position against the bole of the tree.  Numa still was roaring beneath
them, doubtless in anger that he had been robbed of his prey.  Korak
shouted down at him, calling him, in the language of the great apes,
"Old green-eyed eater of carrion," "Brother of Dango," the hyena, and
other choice appellations of jungle opprobrium.

The Hon. Morison Baynes, listening, felt assured that a gorilla had
seized upon him.  He felt for his revolver, and as he was drawing it
stealthily from its holster a voice asked in perfectly good English,
"Who are you?"

Baynes started so that he nearly fell from the branch.

"My God!" he exclaimed.  "Are you a man?"

"What did you think I was?" asked Korak.

"A gorilla," replied Baynes, honestly.

Korak laughed.

"Who are you?" he repeated.

"I'm an Englishman by the name of Baynes; but who the devil are you?"
asked the Hon. Morison.

"They call me The Killer," replied Korak, giving the English
translation of the name that Akut had given him.  And then after a
pause during which the Hon. Morison attempted to pierce the darkness
and catch a glimpse of the features of the strange being into whose
hands he had fallen, "You are the same whom I saw kissing the girl at
the edge of the great plain to the East, that time that the lion
charged you?"

"Yes," replied Baynes.

"What are you doing here?"

"The girl was stolen--I am trying to rescue her."

"Stolen!"  The word was shot out like a bullet from a gun.  "Who stole
her?"

"The Swede trader, Hanson," replied Baynes.

"Where is he?"

Baynes related to Korak all that had transpired since he had come upon
Hanson's camp.  Before he was done the first gray dawn had relieved the
darkness.  Korak made the Englishman comfortable in the tree.  He
filled his canteen from the river and fetched him fruits to eat.  Then
he bid him good-bye.

"I am going to the Swede's camp," he announced.  "I will bring the girl
back to you here."

"I shall go, too, then," insisted Baynes.  "It is my right and my duty,
for she was to have become my wife."

Korak winced.  "You are wounded.  You could not make the trip," he
said.  "I can go much faster alone."

"Go, then," replied Baynes; "but I shall follow.  It is my right and
duty."

"As you will," replied Korak, with a shrug.  If the man wanted to be
killed it was none of his affair.  He wanted to kill him himself, but
for Meriem's sake he would not.  If she loved him then he must do what
he could to preserve him, but he could not prevent his following him,
more than to advise him against it, and this he did, earnestly.

And so Korak set out rapidly toward the North, and limping slowly and
painfully along, soon far to the rear, came the tired and wounded
Baynes.  Korak had reached the river bank opposite Malbihn's camp
before Baynes had covered two miles.  Late in the afternoon the
Englishman was still plodding wearily along, forced to stop often for
rest when he heard the sound of the galloping feet of a horse behind
him.  Instinctively he drew into the concealing foliage of the
underbrush and a moment later a white-robed Arab dashed by.  Baynes did
not hail the rider.  He had heard of the nature of the Arabs who
penetrate thus far to the South, and what he had heard had convinced
him that a snake or a panther would as quickly befriend him as one of
these villainous renegades from the Northland.

When Abdul Kamak had passed out of sight toward the North Baynes
resumed his weary march.  A half hour later he was again surprised by
the unmistakable sound of galloping horses.  This time there were many.
Once more he sought a hiding place; but it chanced that he was crossing
a clearing which offered little opportunity for concealment.  He broke
into a slow trot--the best that he could do in his weakened condition;
but it did not suffice to carry him to safety and before he reached the
opposite side of the clearing a band of white-robed horsemen dashed
into view behind him.

At sight of him they shouted in Arabic, which, of course, he could not
understand, and then they closed about him, threatening and angry.
Their questions were unintelligible to him, and no more could they
interpret his English.  At last, evidently out of patience, the leader
ordered two of his men to seize him, which they lost no time in doing.
They disarmed him and ordered him to climb to the rump of one of the
horses, and then the two who had been detailed to guard him turned and
rode back toward the South, while the others continued their pursuit of
Abdul Kamak.

As Korak came out upon the bank of the river across from which he could
see the camp of Malbihn he was at a loss as to how he was to cross.  He
could see men moving about among the huts inside the boma--evidently
Hanson was still there.  Korak did not know the true identity of
Meriem's abductor.

How was he to cross.  Not even he would dare the perils of the
river--almost certain death.  For a moment he thought, then wheeled and
sped away into the jungle, uttering a peculiar cry, shrill and
piercing.  Now and again he would halt to listen as though for an
answer to his weird call, then on again, deeper and deeper into the
wood.

At last his listening ears were rewarded by the sound they craved--the
trumpeting of a bull elephant, and a few moments later Korak broke
through the trees into the presence of Tantor, standing with upraised
trunk, waving his great ears.

"Quick, Tantor!" shouted the ape-man, and the beast swung him to his
head.  "Hurry!" and the mighty pachyderm lumbered off through the
jungle, guided by kicking of naked heels against the sides of his head.

Toward the northwest Korak guided his huge mount, until they came out
upon the river a mile or more above the Swede's camp, at a point where
Korak knew that there was an elephant ford.  Never pausing the ape-man
urged the beast into the river, and with trunk held high Tantor forged
steadily toward the opposite bank.  Once an unwary crocodile attacked
him but the sinuous trunk dove beneath the surface and grasping the
amphibian about the middle dragged it to light and hurled it a hundred
feet down stream.  And so, in safety, they made the opposite shore,
Korak perched high and dry above the turgid flood.

Then back toward the South Tantor moved, steadily, relentlessly, and
with a swinging gait which took no heed of any obstacle other than the
larger jungle trees.  At times Korak was forced to abandon the broad
head and take to the trees above, so close the branches raked the back
of the elephant; but at last they came to the edge of the clearing
where lay the camp of the renegade Swede, nor even then did they
hesitate or halt.  The gate lay upon the east side of the camp, facing
the river.  Tantor and Korak approached from the north.  There was no
gate there; but what cared Tantor or Korak for gates.

At a word from the ape man and raising his tender trunk high above the
thorns Tantor breasted the boma, walking through it as though it had
not existed.  A dozen blacks squatted before their huts looked up at
the noise of his approach.  With sudden howls of terror and amazement
they leaped to their feet and fled for the open gates.  Tantor would
have pursued.  He hated man, and he thought that Korak had come to hunt
these; but the ape man held him back, guiding him toward a large,
canvas tent that rose in the center of the clearing--there should be
the girl and her abductor.

Malbihn lay in a hammock beneath canopy before his tent.  His wounds
were painful and he had lost much blood.  He was very weak.  He looked
up in surprise as he heard the screams of his men and saw them running
toward the gate.  And then from around the corner of his tent loomed a
huge bulk, and Tantor, the great tusker, towered above him.  Malbihn's
boy, feeling neither affection nor loyalty for his master, broke and
ran at the first glimpse of the beast, and Malbihn was left alone and
helpless.

The elephant stopped a couple of paces from the wounded man's hammock.
Malbihn cowered, moaning.  He was too weak to escape.  He could only
lie there with staring eyes gazing in horror into the blood rimmed,
angry little orbs fixed upon him, and await his death.

Then, to his astonishment, a man slid to the ground from the elephant's
back.  Almost at once Malbihn recognized the strange figure as that of
the creature who consorted with apes and baboons--the white warrior of
the jungle who had freed the king baboon and led the whole angry horde
of hairy devils upon him and Jenssen.  Malbihn cowered still lower.

"Where is the girl?" demanded Korak, in English.

"What girl?" asked Malbihn.  "There is no girl here--only the women of
my boys.  Is it one of them you want?"

"The white girl," replied Korak.  "Do not lie to me--you lured her from
her friends.  You have her.  Where is she?"

"It was not I," cried Malbihn.  "It was an Englishman who hired me to
steal her.  He wished to take her to London with him.  She was willing
to go.  His name is Baynes.  Go to him, if you want to know where the
girl is."

"I have just come from him," said Korak.  "He sent me to you.  The girl
is not with him.  Now stop your lying and tell me the truth.  Where is
she?"  Korak took a threatening step toward the Swede.

Malbihn shrank from the anger in the other's face.

"I will tell you," he cried.  "Do not harm me and I will tell you all
that I know.  I had the girl here; but it was Baynes who persuaded her
to leave her friends--he had promised to marry her.  He does not know
who she is; but I do, and I know that there is a great reward for
whoever takes her back to her people. It was the only reward I wanted.
But she escaped and crossed the river in one of my canoes.  I followed
her, but The Sheik was there, God knows how, and he captured her and
attacked me and drove me back.  Then came Baynes, angry because he had
lost the girl, and shot me.  If you want her, go to The Sheik and ask
him for her--she has passed as his daughter since childhood."

"She is not The Sheik's daughter?" asked Korak.

"She is not," replied Malbihn.

"Who is she then?" asked Korak.

Here Malbihn saw his chance.  Possibly he could make use of his
knowledge after all--it might even buy back his life for him.  He was
not so credulous as to believe that this savage ape-man would have any
compunctions about slaying him.

"When you find her I will tell you," he said, "if you will promise to
spare my life and divide the reward with me.  If you kill me you will
never know, for only The Sheik knows and he will never tell.  The girl
herself is ignorant of her origin."

"If you have told me the truth I will spare you," said Korak.  "I shall
go now to The Sheik's village and if the girl is not there I shall
return and slay you.  As for the other information you have, if the
girl wants it when we have found her we will find a way to purchase it
from you."

The look in the Killer's eyes and his emphasis of the word "purchase"
were none too reassuring to Malbihn.  Evidently, unless he found means
to escape, this devil would have both his secret and his life before he
was done with him.  He wished he would be gone and take his evil-eyed
companion away with him.  The swaying bulk towering high above him, and
the ugly little eyes of the elephant watching his every move made
Malbihn nervous.

Korak stepped into the Swede's tent to assure himself that Meriem was
not hid there.  As he disappeared from view Tantor, his eyes still
fixed upon Malbihn, took a step nearer the man.  An elephant's eyesight
is none too good; but the great tusker evidently had harbored
suspicions of this yellow-bearded white man from the first.  Now he
advanced his snake-like trunk toward the Swede, who shrank still deeper
into his hammock.

The sensitive member felt and smelled back and forth along the body of
the terrified Malbihn.  Tantor uttered a low, rumbling sound.  His
little eyes blazed.  At last he had recognized the creature who had
killed his mate long years before.  Tantor, the elephant, never forgets
and never forgives.  Malbihn saw in the demoniacal visage above him the
murderous purpose of the beast.  He shrieked aloud to Korak.  "Help!
Help!  The devil is going to kill me!"

Korak ran from the tent just in time to see the enraged elephant's
trunk encircle the beast's victim, and then hammock, canopy and man
were swung high over Tantor's head.  Korak leaped before the animal,
commanding him to put down his prey unharmed; but as well might he have
ordered the eternal river to reverse its course.  Tantor wheeled around
like a cat, hurled Malbihn to the earth and kneeled upon him with the
quickness of a cat.  Then he gored the prostrate thing through and
through with his mighty tusks, trumpeting and roaring in his rage, and
at last, convinced that no slightest spark of life remained in the
crushed and lacerated flesh, he lifted the shapeless clay that had been
Sven Malbihn far aloft and hurled the bloody mass, still entangled in
canopy and hammock, over the boma and out into the jungle.

Korak stood looking sorrowfully on at the tragedy he gladly would have
averted.  He had no love for the Swede, in fact only hatred; but he
would have preserved the man for the sake of the secret he possessed.
Now that secret was gone forever unless The Sheik could be made to
divulge it; but in that possibility Korak placed little faith.

The ape-man, as unafraid of the mighty Tantor as though he had not just
witnessed his shocking murder of a human being, signalled the beast to
approach and lift him to its head, and Tantor came as he was bid,
docile as a kitten, and hoisted The Killer tenderly aloft.

From the safety of their hiding places in the jungle Malbihn's boys had
witnessed the killing of their master, and now, with wide, frightened
eyes, they saw the strange white warrior, mounted upon the head of his
ferocious charger, disappear into the jungle at the point from which he
had emerged upon their terrified vision.




Chapter 25


The Sheik glowered at the prisoner which his two men brought back to
him from the North.  He had sent the party after Abdul Kamak, and he
was wroth that instead of his erstwhile lieutenant they had sent back a
wounded and useless Englishman.  Why had they not dispatched him where
they had found him?  He was some penniless beggar of a trader who had
wandered from his own district and became lost.  He was worthless.  The
Sheik scowled terribly upon him.

"Who are you?" he asked in French.

"I am the Hon. Morison Baynes of London," replied his prisoner.

The title sounded promising, and at once the wily old robber had
visions of ransom.  His intentions, if not his attitude toward the
prisoner underwent a change--he would investigate further.

"What were you doing poaching in my country?" growled he.

"I was not aware that you owned Africa," replied the Hon. Morison.  "I
was searching for a young woman who had been abducted from the home of
a friend.  The abductor wounded me and I drifted down river in a
canoe--I was on my way back to his camp when your men seized me."

"A young woman?" asked The Sheik.  "Is that she?" and he pointed to his
left over toward a clump of bushes near the stockade.

Baynes looked in the direction indicated and his eyes went wide, for
there, sitting cross-legged upon the ground, her back toward them, was
Meriem.

"Meriem!" he shouted, starting toward her; but one of his guards
grasped his arm and jerked him back.  The girl leaped to her feet and
turned toward him as she heard her name.

"Morison!" she cried.

"Be still, and stay where you are," snapped The Sheik, and then to
Baynes.  "So you are the dog of a Christian who stole my daughter from
me?"

"Your daughter?" ejaculated Baynes.  "She is your daughter?"

"She is my daughter," growled the Arab, "and she is not for any
unbeliever.  You have earned death, Englishman, but if you can pay for
your life I will give it to you."

Baynes' eyes were still wide at the unexpected sight of Meriem here in
the camp of the Arab when he had thought her in Hanson's power.  What
had happened?  How had she escaped the Swede?  Had the Arab taken her
by force from him, or had she escaped and come voluntarily back to the
protection of the man who called her "daughter"?  He would have given
much for a word with her.  If she was safe here he might only harm her
by antagonizing the Arab in an attempt to take her away and return her
to her English friends.  No longer did the Hon. Morison harbor thoughts
of luring the girl to London.

"Well?" asked The Sheik.

"Oh," exclaimed Baynes; "I beg your pardon--I was thinking of something
else.  Why yes, of course, glad to pay, I'm sure.  How much do you
think I'm worth?"

The Sheik named a sum that was rather less exorbitant than the Hon.
Morison had anticipated.  The latter nodded his head in token of his
entire willingness to pay.  He would have promised a sum far beyond his
resources just as readily, for he had no intention of paying
anything--his one reason for seeming to comply with The Sheik's demands
was that the wait for the coming of the ransom money would give him the
time and the opportunity to free Meriem if he found that she wished to
be freed.  The Arab's statement that he was her father naturally raised
the question in the Hon.  Morison's mind as to precisely what the
girl's attitude toward escape might be.  It seemed, of course,
preposterous that this fair and beautiful young woman should prefer to
remain in the filthy douar of an illiterate old Arab rather than return
to the comforts, luxuries, and congenial associations of the hospitable
African bungalow from which the Hon. Morison had tricked her.  The man
flushed at the thought of his duplicity which these recollections
aroused--thoughts which were interrupted by The Sheik, who instructed
the Hon. Morison to write a letter to the British consul at Algiers,
dictating the exact phraseology of it with a fluency that indicated to
his captive that this was not the first time the old rascal had had
occasion to negotiate with English relatives for the ransom of a
kinsman.  Baynes demurred when he saw that the letter was addressed to
the consul at Algiers, saying that it would require the better part of
a year to get the money back to him; but The Sheik would not listen to
Baynes' plan to send a messenger directly to the nearest coast town,
and from there communicate with the nearest cable station, sending the
Hon. Morison's request for funds straight to his own solicitors.  No,
The Sheik was cautious and wary.  He knew his own plan had worked well
in the past.  In the other were too many untried elements.  He was in
no hurry for the money--he could wait a year, or two years if
necessary; but it should not require over six months.  He turned to one
of the Arabs who had been standing behind him and gave the fellow
instructions in relation to the prisoner.

Baynes could not understand the words, spoken in Arabic, but the jerk
of the thumb toward him showed that he was the subject of conversation.
The Arab addressed by The Sheik bowed to his master and beckoned Baynes
to follow him.  The Englishman looked toward The Sheik for
confirmation.  The latter nodded impatiently, and the Hon. Morison rose
and followed his guide toward a native hut which lay close beside one
of the outside goatskin tents.  In the dark, stifling interior his
guard led him, then stepped to the doorway and called to a couple of
black boys squatting before their own huts.  They came promptly and in
accordance with the Arab's instructions bound Baynes' wrists and ankles
securely.  The Englishman objected strenuously; but as neither the
blacks nor the Arab could understand a word he said his pleas were
wasted.  Having bound him they left the hut.  The Hon. Morison lay for
a long time contemplating the frightful future which awaited him during
the long months which must intervene before his friends learned of his
predicament and could get succor to him.  Now he hoped that they would
send the ransom--he would gladly pay all that he was worth to be out of
this hole.  At first it had been his intention to cable his solicitors
to send no money but to communicate with the British West African
authorities and have an expedition sent to his aid.

His patrician nose wrinkled in disgust as his nostrils were assailed by
the awful stench of the hut.  The nasty grasses upon which he lay
exuded the effluvium of sweaty bodies, of decayed animal matter and of
offal.  But worse was yet to come.  He had lain in the uncomfortable
position in which they had thrown him but for a few minutes when he
became distinctly conscious of an acute itching sensation upon his
hands, his neck and scalp.  He wriggled to a sitting posture horrified
and disgusted.  The itching rapidly extended to other parts of his
body--it was torture, and his hands were bound securely at his back!

He tugged and pulled at his bonds until he was exhausted; but not
entirely without hope, for he was sure that he was working enough slack
out of the knot to eventually permit of his withdrawing one of his
hands.  Night came.  They brought him neither food nor drink.  He
wondered if they expected him to live on nothing for a year.  The bites
of the vermin grew less annoying though not less numerous.  The Hon.
Morison saw a ray of hope in this indication of future immunity through
inoculation.  He still worked weakly at his bonds, and then the rats
came.  If the vermin were disgusting the rats were terrifying.  They
scurried over his body, squealing and fighting.  Finally one commenced
to chew at one of his ears.  With an oath, the Hon. Morison struggled
to a sitting posture.  The rats retreated.  He worked his legs beneath
him and came to his knees, and then, by superhuman effort, rose to his
feet.  There he stood, reeling drunkenly, dripping with cold sweat.

"God!" he muttered, "what have I done to deserve--"  He paused.  What
had he done?  He thought of the girl in another tent in that accursed
village.  He was getting his deserts.  He set his jaws firmly with the
realization.  He would never complain again!  At that moment he became
aware of voices raised angrily in the goatskin tent close beside the
hut in which he lay.  One of them was a woman's.  Could it be Meriem's?
The language was probably Arabic--he could not understand a word of it;
but the tones were hers.

He tried to think of some way of attracting her attention to his near
presence.  If she could remove his bonds they might escape together--if
she wished to escape.  That thought bothered him.  He was not sure of
her status in the village.  If she were the petted child of the
powerful Sheik then she would probably not care to escape.  He must
know, definitely.

At the bungalow he had often heard Meriem sing God Save the King, as My
Dear accompanied her on the piano.  Raising his voice he now hummed the
tune.  Immediately he heard Meriem's voice from the tent.  She spoke
rapidly.

"Good bye, Morison," she cried.  "If God is good I shall be dead before
morning, for if I still live I shall be worse than dead after tonight."

Then he heard an angry exclamation in a man's voice, followed by the
sounds of a scuffle.  Baynes went white with horror.  He struggled
frantically again with his bonds.  They were giving.  A moment later
one hand was free.  It was but the work of an instant then to loose the
other.  Stooping, he untied the rope from his ankles, then he
straightened and started for the hut doorway bent on reaching Meriem's
side.  As he stepped out into the night the figure of a huge black rose
and barred his progress.


When speed was required of him Korak depended upon no other muscles
than his own, and so it was that the moment Tantor had landed him
safely upon the same side of the river as lay the village of The Sheik,
the ape-man deserted his bulky comrade and took to the trees in a rapid
race toward the south and the spot where the Swede had told him Meriem
might be.  It was dark when he came to the palisade, strengthened
considerably since the day that he had rescued Meriem from her pitiful
life within its cruel confines.  No longer did the giant tree spread
its branches above the wooden rampart; but ordinary man-made defenses
were scarce considered obstacles by Korak.  Loosening the rope at his
waist he tossed the noose over one of the sharpened posts that composed
the palisade.  A moment later his eyes were above the level of the
obstacle taking in all within their range beyond.  There was no one in
sight close by, and Korak drew himself to the top and dropped lightly
to the ground within the enclosure.

Then he commenced his stealthy search of the village.  First toward the
Arab tents he made his way, sniffing and listening.  He passed behind
them searching for some sign of Meriem.  Not even the wild Arab curs
heard his passage, so silently he went--a shadow passing through
shadows.  The odor of tobacco told him that the Arabs were smoking
before their tents.  The sound of laughter fell upon his ears, and then
from the opposite side of the village came the notes of a once familiar
tune: God Save the King.  Korak halted in perplexity.  Who might it
be--the tones were those of a man.  He recalled the young Englishman he
had left on the river trail and who had disappeared before he returned.
A moment later there came to him a woman's voice in reply--it was
Meriem's, and The Killer, quickened into action, slunk rapidly in the
direction of these two voices.

The evening meal over Meriem had gone to her pallet in the women's
quarters of The Sheik's tent, a little corner screened off in the rear
by a couple of priceless Persian rugs to form a partition.  In these
quarters she had dwelt with Mabunu alone, for The Sheik had no wives.
Nor were conditions altered now after the years of her absence--she and
Mabunu were alone in the women's quarters.

Presently The Sheik came and parted the rugs.  He glared through the
dim light of the interior.

"Meriem!" he called.  "Come hither."

The girl arose and came into the front of the tent.  There the light of
a fire illuminated the interior.  She saw Ali ben Kadin, The Sheik's
half brother, squatted upon a rug, smoking.  The Sheik was standing.
The Sheik and Ali ben Kadin had had the same father, but Ali ben
Kadin's mother had been a slave--a West Coast Negress.  Ali ben Kadin
was old and hideous and almost black.  His nose and part of one cheek
were eaten away by disease.  He looked up and grinned as Meriem entered.

The Sheik jerked his thumb toward Ali ben Kadin and addressed Meriem.

"I am getting old," he said, "I shall not live much longer.  Therefore
I have given you to Ali ben Kadin, my brother."

That was all.  Ali ben Kadin rose and came toward her.  Meriem shrank
back, horrified.  The man seized her wrist.

"Come!" he commanded, and dragged her from The Sheik's tent and to his
own.

After they had gone The Sheik chuckled.  "When I send her north in a
few months," he soliloquized, "they will know the reward for slaying
the son of the sister of Amor ben Khatour."

And in Ali ben Kadin's tent Meriem pleaded and threatened, but all to
no avail.  The hideous old halfcaste spoke soft words at first, but
when Meriem loosed upon him the vials of her horror and loathing he
became enraged, and rushing upon her seized her in his arms.  Twice she
tore away from him, and in one of the intervals during which she
managed to elude him she heard Baynes' voice humming the tune that she
knew was meant for her ears.  At her reply Ali ben Kadin rushed upon
her once again.  This time he dragged her back into the rear apartment
of his tent where three Negresses looked up in stolid indifference to
the tragedy being enacted before them.

As the Hon. Morison saw his way blocked by the huge frame of the giant
black his disappointment and rage filled him with a bestial fury that
transformed him into a savage beast.  With an oath he leaped upon the
man before him, the momentum of his body hurling the black to the
ground.  There they fought, the black to draw his knife, the white to
choke the life from the black.

Baynes' fingers shut off the cry for help that the other would have
been glad to voice; but presently the Negro succeeded in drawing his
weapon and an instant later Baynes felt the sharp steel in his
shoulder.  Again and again the weapon fell.  The white man removed one
hand from its choking grip upon the black throat.  He felt around upon
the ground beside him searching for some missile, and at last his
fingers touched a stone and closed upon it.  Raising it above his
antagonist's head the Hon. Morison drove home a terrific blow.
Instantly the black relaxed--stunned.  Twice more Baynes struck him.
Then he leaped to his feet and ran for the goat skin tent from which he
had heard the voice of Meriem in distress.

But before him was another.  Naked but for his leopard skin and his
loin cloth, Korak, The Killer, slunk into the shadows at the back of
Ali ben Kadin's tent.  The half-caste had just dragged Meriem into the
rear chamber as Korak's sharp knife slit a six foot opening in the tent
wall, and Korak, tall and mighty, sprang through upon the astonished
visions of the inmates.

Meriem saw and recognized him the instant that he entered the
apartment.  Her heart leaped in pride and joy at the sight of the noble
figure for which it had hungered for so long.

"Korak!" she cried.

"Meriem!"  He uttered the single word as he hurled himself upon the
astonished Ali ben Kadin.  The three Negresses leaped from their
sleeping mats, screaming.  Meriem tried to prevent them from escaping;
but before she could succeed the terrified blacks had darted through
the hole in the tent wall made by Korak's knife, and were gone
screaming through the village.

The Killer's fingers closed once upon the throat of the hideous Ali.
Once his knife plunged into the putrid heart--and Ali ben Kadin lay
dead upon the floor of his tent.  Korak turned toward Meriem and at the
same moment a bloody and disheveled apparition leaped into the
apartment.

"Morison!" cried the girl.

Korak turned and looked at the new comer.  He had been about to take
Meriem in his arms, forgetful of all that might have transpired since
last he had seen her.  Then the coming of the young Englishman recalled
the scene he had witnessed in the little clearing, and a wave of misery
swept over the ape man.

Already from without came the sounds of the alarm that the three
Negresses had started.  Men were running toward the tent of Ali ben
Kadin.  There was no time to be lost.

"Quick!" cried Korak, turning toward Baynes, who had scarce yet
realized whether he was facing a friend or foe.  "Take her to the
palisade, following the rear of the tents.  Here is my rope.  With it
you can scale the wall and make your escape."

"But you, Korak?" cried Meriem.

"I will remain," replied the ape-man.  "I have business with The Sheik."

Meriem would have demurred, but The Killer seized them both by the
shoulders and hustled them through the slit wall and out into the
shadows beyond.

"Now run for it," he admonished, and turned to meet and hold those who
were pouring into the tent from the front.

The ape-man fought well--fought as he had never fought before; but the
odds were too great for victory, though he won that which he most
craved--time for the Englishman to escape with Meriem.  Then he was
overwhelmed by numbers, and a few minutes later, bound and guarded, he
was carried to The Sheik's tent.

The old men eyed him in silence for a long time.  He was trying to fix
in his own mind some form of torture that would gratify his rage and
hatred toward this creature who twice had been the means of his losing
possession of Meriem.  The killing of Ali ben Kadin caused him little
anger--always had he hated the hideous son of his father's hideous
slave.  The blow that this naked white warrior had once struck him
added fuel to his rage.  He could think of nothing adequate to the
creature's offense.

And as he sat there looking upon Korak the silence was broken by the
trumpeting of an elephant in the jungle beyond the palisade.  A half
smile touched Korak's lips.  He turned his head a trifle in the
direction from which the sound had come and then there broke from his
lips, a low, weird call.  One of the blacks guarding him struck him
across the mouth with the haft of his spear; but none there knew the
significance of his cry.

In the jungle Tantor cocked his ears as the sound of Korak's voice fell
upon them.  He approached the palisade and lifting his trunk above it,
sniffed.  Then he placed his head against the wooden logs and pushed;
but the palisade was strong and only gave a little to the pressure.

In The Sheik's tent The Sheik rose at last, and, pointing toward the
bound captive, turned to one of his lieutenants.

"Burn him," he commanded.  "At once.  The stake is set."

The guard pushed Korak from The Sheik's presence.  They dragged him to
the open space in the center of the village, where a high stake was set
in the ground.  It had not been intended for burnings, but offered a
convenient place to tie up refractory slaves that they might be
beaten--ofttimes until death relieved their agonies.

To this stake they bound Korak.  Then they brought brush and piled
about him, and The Sheik came and stood by that he might watch the
agonies of his victim.  But Korak did not wince even after they had
fetched a brand and the flames had shot up among the dry tinder.

Once, then, he raised his voice in the low call that he had given in
The Sheik's tent, and now, from beyond the palisade, came again the
trumpeting of an elephant.

Old Tantor had been pushing at the palisade in vain.  The sound of
Korak's voice calling him, and the scent of man, his enemy, filled the
great beast with rage and resentment against the dumb barrier that held
him back.  He wheeled and shuffled back a dozen paces, then he turned,
lifted his trunk and gave voice to a mighty roaring, trumpet-call of
anger, lowered his head and charged like a huge battering ram of flesh
and bone and muscle straight for the mighty barrier.

The palisade sagged and splintered to the impact, and through the
breach rushed the infuriated bull.  Korak heard the sounds that the
others heard, and he interpreted them as the others did not.  The
flames were creeping closer to him when one of the blacks, hearing a
noise behind him turned to see the enormous bulk of Tantor lumbering
toward them.  The man screamed and fled, and then the bull elephant was
among them tossing Negroes and Arabs to right and left as he tore
through the flames he feared to the side of the comrade he loved.

The Sheik, calling orders to his followers, ran to his tent to get his
rifle.  Tantor wrapped his trunk about the body of Korak and the stake
to which it was bound, and tore it from the ground.  The flames were
searing his sensitive hide--sensitive for all its thickness--so that in
his frenzy to both rescue his friend and escape the hated fire he had
all but crushed the life from the ape-man.

Lifting his burden high above his head the giant beast wheeled and
raced for the breach that he had just made in the palisade.  The Sheik,
rifle in hand, rushed from his tent directly into the path of the
maddened brute.  He raised his weapon and fired once, the bullet missed
its mark, and Tantor was upon him, crushing him beneath those gigantic
feet as he raced over him as you and I might crush out the life of an
ant that chanced to be in our pathway.

And then, bearing his burden carefully, Tantor, the elephant, entered
the blackness of the jungle.




Chapter 26


Meriem, dazed by the unexpected sight of Korak whom she had long given
up as dead, permitted herself to be led away by Baynes.  Among the
tents he guided her safely to the palisade, and there, following
Korak's instructions, the Englishman pitched a noose over the top of
one of the upright logs that formed the barrier.  With difficulty he
reached the top and then lowered his hand to assist Meriem to his side.

"Come!" he whispered.  "We must hurry."  And then, as though she had
awakened from a sleep, Meriem came to herself.  Back there, fighting
her enemies, alone, was Korak--her Korak.  Her place was by his side,
fighting with him and for him.  She glanced up at Baynes.

"Go!" she called.  "Make your way back to Bwana and bring help.  My
place is here.  You can do no good remaining.  Get away while you can
and bring the Big Bwana back with you."

Silently the Hon. Morison Baynes slid to the ground inside the palisade
to Meriem's side.

"It was only for you that I left him," he said, nodding toward the
tents they had just left.  "I knew that he could hold them longer than
I and give you a chance to escape that I might not be able to have
given you.  It was I though who should have remained.  I heard you call
him Korak and so I know now who he is.  He befriended you.  I would
have wronged you.  No--don't interrupt.  I'm going to tell you the
truth now and let you know just what a beast I have been.  I planned to
take you to London, as you know; but I did not plan to marry you.  Yes,
shrink from me--I deserve it.  I deserve your contempt and loathing;
but I didn't know then what love was.  Since I have learned that I have
learned something else--what a cad and what a coward I have been all my
life.  I looked down upon those whom I considered my social inferiors.
I did not think you good enough to bear my name.  Since Hanson tricked
me and took you for himself I have been through hell; but it has made a
man of me, though too late.  Now I can come to you with an offer of
honest love, which will realize the honor of having such as you share
my name with me."

For a moment Meriem was silent, buried in thought.  Her first question
seemed irrelevant.

"How did you happen to be in this village?" she asked.

He told her all that had transpired since the black had told him of
Hanson's duplicity.

"You say that you are a coward," she said, "and yet you have done all
this to save me?  The courage that it must have taken to tell me the
things that you told me but a moment since, while courage of a
different sort, proves that you are no moral coward, and the other
proves that you are not a physical coward.  I could not love a coward."

"You mean that you love me?" he gasped in astonishment, taking a step
toward her as though to gather her into his arms; but she placed her
hand against him and pushed him gently away, as much as to say, not
yet.  What she did mean she scarcely knew.  She thought that she loved
him, of that there can be no question; nor did she think that love for
this young Englishman was disloyalty to Korak, for her love for Korak
was undiminished--the love of a sister for an indulgent brother.  As
they stood there for the moment of their conversation the sounds of
tumult in the village subsided.

"They have killed him," whispered Meriem.

The statement brought Baynes to a realization of the cause of their
return.

"Wait here," he said.  "I will go and see.  If he is dead we can do him
no good.  If he lives I will do my best to free him."

"We will go together," replied Meriem.  "Come!"  And she led the way
back toward the tent in which they last had seen Korak.  As they went
they were often forced to throw themselves to the ground in the shadow
of a tent or hut, for people were passing hurriedly to and fro now--the
whole village was aroused and moving about.  The return to the tent of
Ali ben Kadin took much longer than had their swift flight to the
palisade.  Cautiously they crept to the slit that Korak's knife had
made in the rear wall.  Meriem peered within--the rear apartment was
empty.  She crawled through the aperture, Baynes at her heels, and then
silently crossed the space to the rugs that partitioned the tent into
two rooms.  Parting the hangings Meriem looked into the front room.
It, too, was deserted.  She crossed to the door of the tent and looked
out.  Then she gave a little gasp of horror.  Baynes at her shoulder
looked past her to the sight that had startled her, and he, too,
exclaimed; but his was an oath of anger.

A hundred feet away they saw Korak bound to a stake--the brush piled
about him already alight.  The Englishman pushed Meriem to one side and
started to run for the doomed man.  What he could do in the face of
scores of hostile blacks and Arabs he did not stop to consider.  At the
same instant Tantor broke through the palisade and charged the group.
In the face of the maddened beast the crowd turned and fled, carrying
Baynes backward with them.  In a moment it was all over, and the
elephant had disappeared with his prize; but pandemonium reigned
throughout the village.  Men, women and children ran helter skelter for
safety.  Curs fled, yelping.  The horses and camels and donkeys,
terrorized by the trumpeting of the pachyderm, kicked and pulled at
their tethers.  A dozen or more broke loose, and it was the galloping
of these past him that brought a sudden idea into Baynes' head.  He
turned to search for Meriem only to find her at his elbow.

"The horses!" he cried.  "If we can get a couple of them!"

Filled with the idea Meriem led him to the far end of the village.

"Loosen two of them," she said, "and lead them back into the shadows
behind those huts.  I know where there are saddles.  I will bring them
and the bridles," and before he could stop her she was gone.

Baynes quickly untied two of the restive animals and led them to the
point designated by Meriem.  Here he waited impatiently for what seemed
an hour; but was, in reality, but a few minutes.  Then he saw the girl
approaching beneath the burden of two saddles.  Quickly they placed
these upon the horses.  They could see by the light of the torture fire
that still burned that the blacks and Arabs were recovering from their
panic.  Men were running about gathering in the loose stock, and two or
three were already leading their captives back to the end of the
village where Meriem and Baynes were busy with the trappings of their
mounts.

Now the girl flung herself into the saddle.

"Hurry!" she whispered.  "We shall have to run for it.  Ride through
the gap that Tantor made," and as she saw Baynes swing his leg over the
back of his horse, she shook the reins free over her mount's neck.
With a lunge, the nervous beast leaped forward.  The shortest path led
straight through the center of the village, and this Meriem took.
Baynes was close behind her, their horses running at full speed.

So sudden and impetuous was their dash for escape that it carried them
half-way across the village before the surprised inhabitants were aware
of what was happening.  Then an Arab recognized them, and, with a cry
of alarm, raised his rifle and fired.  The shot was a signal for a
volley, and amid the rattle of musketry Meriem and Baynes leaped their
flying mounts through the breach in the palisade and were gone up the
well-worn trail toward the north.

And Korak?

Tantor carried him deep into the jungle, nor paused until no sound from
the distant village reached his keen ears.  Then he laid his burden
gently down.  Korak struggled to free himself from his bonds, but even
his great strength was unable to cope with the many strands of
hard-knotted cord that bound him.  While he lay there, working and
resting by turns, the elephant stood guard above him, nor was there
jungle enemy with the hardihood to tempt the sudden death that lay in
that mighty bulk.

Dawn came, and still Korak was no nearer freedom than before.  He
commenced to believe that he should die there of thirst and starvation
with plenty all about him, for he knew that Tantor could not unloose
the knots that held him.

And while he struggled through the night with his bonds, Baynes and
Meriem were riding rapidly northward along the river.  The girl had
assured Baynes that Korak was safe in the jungle with Tantor.  It had
not occurred to her that the ape-man might not be able to burst his
bonds.  Baynes had been wounded by a shot from the rifle of one of the
Arabs, and the girl wanted to get him back to Bwana's home, where he
could be properly cared for.

"Then," she said, "I shall get Bwana to come with me and search for
Korak.  He must come and live with us."

All night they rode, and the day was still young when they came
suddenly upon a party hurrying southward.  It was Bwana himself and his
sleek, black warriors.  At sight of Baynes the big Englishman's brows
contracted in a scowl; but he waited to hear Meriem's story before
giving vent to the long anger in his breast.  When she had finished he
seemed to have forgotten Baynes.  His thoughts were occupied with
another subject.

"You say that you found Korak?" he asked.  "You really saw him?"

"Yes," replied Meriem; "as plainly as I see you, and I want you to come
with me, Bwana, and help me find him again."

"Did you see him?"  He turned toward the Hon. Morison.

"Yes, sir," replied Baynes; "very plainly."

"What sort of appearing man is he?" continued Bwana.  "About how old,
should you say?"

"I should say he was an Englishman, about my own age," replied Baynes;
"though he might be older.  He is remarkably muscled, and exceedingly
tanned."

"His eyes and hair, did you notice them?"  Bwana spoke rapidly, almost
excitedly.  It was Meriem who answered him.

"Korak's hair is black and his eyes are gray," she said.

Bwana turned to his headman.

"Take Miss Meriem and Mr. Baynes home," he said.  "I am going into the
jungle."

"Let me go with you, Bwana," cried Meriem.  "You are going to search
for Korak.  Let me go, too."

Bwana turned sadly but firmly upon the girl.

"Your place," he said, "is beside the man you love."

Then he motioned to his head-man to take his horse and commence the
return journey to the farm.  Meriem slowly mounted the tired Arab that
had brought her from the village of The Sheik.  A litter was rigged for
the now feverish Baynes, and the little cavalcade was soon slowly
winding off along the river trail.

Bwana stood watching them until they were out of sight.  Not once had
Meriem turned her eyes backward.  She rode with bowed head and drooping
shoulders.  Bwana sighed.  He loved the little Arab girl as he might
have loved an own daughter.  He realized that Baynes had redeemed
himself, and so he could interpose no objections now if Meriem really
loved the man; but, somehow, some way, Bwana could not convince himself
that the Hon. Morison was worthy of his little Meriem.  Slowly he
turned toward a nearby tree.  Leaping upward he caught a lower branch
and drew himself up among the branches.  His movements were cat-like
and agile.  High into the trees he made his way and there commenced to
divest himself of his clothing. From the game bag slung across one
shoulder he drew a long strip of doe-skin, a neatly coiled rope, and a
wicked looking knife.  The doe-skin, he fashioned into a loin cloth,
the rope he looped over one shoulder, and the knife he thrust into the
belt formed by his gee string.

When he stood erect, his head thrown back and his great chest expanded
a grim smile touched his lips for a moment.  His nostrils dilated as he
sniffed the jungle odors.  His gray eyes narrowed.  He crouched and
leaped to a lower limb and was away through the trees toward the
southeast, bearing away from the river.  He moved swiftly, stopping
only occasionally to raise his voice in a weird and piercing scream,
and to listen for a moment after for a reply.

He had traveled thus for several hours when, ahead of him and a little
to his left, he heard, far off in the jungle, a faint response--the cry
of a bull ape answering his cry.  His nerves tingled and his eyes
lighted as the sound fell upon his ears.  Again he voiced his hideous
call, and sped forward in the new direction.

Korak, finally becoming convinced that he must die if he remained where
he was, waiting for the succor that could not come, spoke to Tantor in
the strange tongue that the great beast understood.  He commanded the
elephant to lift him and carry him toward the northeast.  There,
recently, Korak had seen both white men and black.  If he could come
upon one of the latter it would be a simple matter to command Tantor to
capture the fellow, and then Korak could get him to release him from
the stake.  It was worth trying at least--better than lying there in
the jungle until he died.  As Tantor bore him along through the forest
Korak called aloud now and then in the hope of attracting Akut's band
of anthropoids, whose wanderings often brought them into their
neighborhood.  Akut, he thought, might possibly be able to negotiate
the knots--he had done so upon that other occasion when the Russian had
bound Korak years before; and Akut, to the south of him, heard his
calls faintly, and came.  There was another who heard them, too.

After Bwana had left his party, sending them back toward the farm,
Meriem had ridden for a short distance with bowed head.  What thoughts
passed through that active brain who may say?  Presently she seemed to
come to a decision.  She called the headman to her side.

"I am going back with Bwana," she announced.

The black shook his head.  "No!" he announced.  "Bwana says I take you
home.  So I take you home."

"You refuse to let me go?" asked the girl.

The black nodded, and fell to the rear where he might better watch her.
Meriem half smiled.  Presently her horse passed beneath a low-hanging
branch, and the black headman found himself gazing at the girl's empty
saddle.  He ran forward to the tree into which she had disappeared.  He
could see nothing of her.  He called; but there was no response, unless
it might have been a low, taunting laugh far to the right.  He sent his
men into the jungle to search for her; but they came back empty handed.
After a while he resumed his march toward the farm, for Baynes, by this
time, was delirious with fever.

Meriem raced straight back toward the point she imagined Tantor would
make for--a point where she knew the elephants often gathered deep in
the forest due east of The Sheik's village.  She moved silently and
swiftly.  From her mind she had expunged all thoughts other than that
she must reach Korak and bring him back with her.  It was her place to
do that.  Then, too, had come the tantalizing fear that all might not
be well with him.  She upbraided herself for not thinking of that
before--of letting her desire to get the wounded Morison back to the
bungalow blind her to the possibilities of Korak's need for her.  She
had been traveling rapidly for several hours without rest when she
heard ahead of her the familiar cry of a great ape calling to his kind.

She did not reply, only increased her speed until she almost flew.  Now
there came to her sensitive nostrils the scent of Tantor and she knew
that she was on the right trail and close to him she sought.  She did
not call out because she wished to surprise him, and presently she did,
breaking into sight of them as the great elephant shuffled ahead
balancing the man and the heavy stake upon his head, holding them there
with his upcurled trunk.

"Korak!" cried Meriem from the foliage above him.

Instantly the bull swung about, lowered his burden to the ground and,
trumpeting savagely, prepared to defend his comrade.  The ape-man,
recognizing the girl's voice, felt a sudden lump in his throat.

"Meriem!" he called back to her.

Happily the girl clambered to the ground and ran forward to release
Korak; but Tantor lowered his head ominously and trumpeted a warning.

"Go back!  Go back!" cried Korak.  "He will kill you."

Meriem paused.  "Tantor!" she called to the huge brute.  "Don't you
remember me?  I am little Meriem.  I used to ride on your broad back;"
but the bull only rumbled in his throat and shook his tusks in angry
defiance.  Then Korak tried to placate him.  Tried to order him away,
that the girl might approach and release him; but Tantor would not go.
He saw in every human being other than Korak an enemy.  He thought the
girl bent upon harming his friend and he would take no chances.  For an
hour the girl and the man tried to find some means whereby they might
circumvent the beast's ill directed guardianship, but all to no avail;
Tantor stood his ground in grim determination to let no one approach
Korak.

Presently the man hit upon a scheme.  "Pretend to go away," he called
to the girl.  "Keep down wind from us so that Tantor won't get your
scent, then follow us.  After a while I'll have him put me down, and
find some pretext for sending him away.  While he is gone you can slip
up and cut my bonds--have you a knife?"

"Yes, I have a knife," she replied.  "I'll go now--I think we may be
able to fool him; but don't be too sure--Tantor invented cunning."

Korak smiled, for he knew that the girl was right.  Presently she had
disappeared.  The elephant listened, and raised his trunk to catch her
scent.  Korak commanded him to raise him to his head once more and
proceed upon their way.  After a moment's hesitation he did as he was
bid.  It was then that Korak heard the distant call of an ape.

"Akut!" he thought.  "Good!  Tantor knew Akut well.  He would let him
approach."  Raising his voice Korak replied to the call of the ape; but
he let Tantor move off with him through the jungle; it would do no harm
to try the other plan.  They had come to a clearing and plainly Korak
smelled water.  Here was a good place and a good excuse.  He ordered
Tantor to lay him down, and go and fetch him water in his trunk.  The
big beast deposited him upon the grass in the center of the clearing,
then he stood with cocked ears and attentive trunk, searching for the
slightest indication of danger--there seemed to be none and he moved
away in the direction of the little brook that Korak knew was some two
or three hundred yards away.  The ape-man could scarce help smiling as
he thought how cleverly he had tricked his friend; but well as he knew
Tantor he little guessed the guile of his cunning brain.  The animal
ambled off across the clearing and disappeared in the jungle beyond in
the direction of the stream; but scarce had his great bulk been
screened by the dense foliage than he wheeled about and came cautiously
back to the edge of the clearing where he could see without being seen.
Tantor, by nature, is suspicious.  Now he still feared the return of
the she Tarmangani who had attempted to attack his Korak.  He would
just stand there for a moment and assure himself that all was well
before he continued on toward the water.  Ah!  It was well that he did!
There she was now dropping from the branches of a tree across the
clearing and running swiftly toward the ape-man.  Tantor waited.  He
would let her reach Korak before he charged--that would ensure that she
had no chance of escape.  His little eyes blazed savagely.  His tail
was elevated stiffly.  He could scarce restrain a desire to trumpet
forth his rage to the world.  Meriem was almost at Korak's side when
Tantor saw the long knife in her hand, and then he broke forth from the
jungle, bellowing horribly, and charged down upon the frail girl.




Chapter 27


Korak screamed commands to his huge protector, in an effort to halt
him; but all to no avail.  Meriem raced toward the bordering trees with
all the speed that lay in her swift, little feet; but Tantor, for all
his huge bulk, drove down upon her with the rapidity of an express
train.

Korak lay where he could see the whole frightful tragedy.  The cold
sweat broke out upon his body.  His heart seemed to have stopped its
beating.  Meriem might reach the trees before Tantor overtook her, but
even her agility would not carry her beyond the reach of that
relentless trunk--she would be dragged down and tossed.  Korak could
picture the whole frightful scene.  Then Tantor would follow her up,
goring the frail, little body with his relentless tusks, or trampling
it into an unrecognizable mass beneath his ponderous feet.

He was almost upon her now.  Korak wanted to close his eyes, but could
not.  His throat was dry and parched.  Never in all his savage
existence had he suffered such blighting terror--never before had he
known what terror meant.  A dozen more strides and the brute would
seize her.  What was that?  Korak's eyes started from their sockets.  A
strange figure had leaped from the tree the shade of which Meriem
already had reached--leaped beyond the girl straight into the path of
the charging elephant.  It was a naked white giant.  Across his
shoulder a coil of rope was looped.  In the band of his gee string was
a hunting knife.  Otherwise he was unarmed.  With naked hands he faced
the maddening Tantor.  A sharp command broke from the stranger's
lips--the great beast halted in his tracks--and Meriem swung herself
upward into the tree to safety.  Korak breathed a sigh of relief not
unmixed with wonder.  He fastened his eyes upon the face of Meriem's
deliverer and as recognition slowly filtered into his understanding
they went wide in incredulity and surprise.

Tantor, still rumbling angrily, stood swaying to and fro close before
the giant white man.  Then the latter stepped straight beneath the
upraised trunk and spoke a low word of command.  The great beast ceased
his muttering.  The savage light died from his eyes, and as the
stranger stepped forward toward Korak, Tantor trailed docilely at his
heels.

Meriem was watching, too, and wondering.  Suddenly the man turned
toward her as though recollecting her presence after a moment of
forgetfulness.  "Come!  Meriem," he called, and then she recognized him
with a startled:  "Bwana!"  Quickly the girl dropped from the tree and
ran to his side.  Tantor cocked a questioning eye at the white giant,
but receiving a warning word let Meriem approach.  Together the two
walked to where Korak lay, his eyes wide with wonder and filled with a
pathetic appeal for forgiveness, and, mayhap, a glad thankfulness for
the miracle that had brought these two of all others to his side.

"Jack!" cried the white giant, kneeling at the ape-man's side.

"Father!" came chokingly from The Killer's lips.  "Thank God that it
was you.  No one else in all the jungle could have stopped Tantor."

Quickly the man cut the bonds that held Korak, and as the youth leaped
to his feet and threw his arms about his father, the older man turned
toward Meriem.

"I thought," he said, sternly, "that I told you to return to the farm."

Korak was looking at them wonderingly.  In his heart was a great
yearning to take the girl in his arms; but in time he remembered the
other--the dapper young English gentleman--and that he was but a
savage, uncouth ape-man.

Meriem looked up pleadingly into Bwana's eyes.

"You told me," she said, in a very small voice, "that my place was
beside the man I loved," and she turned her eyes toward Korak all
filled with the wonderful light that no other man had yet seen in them,
and that none other ever would.

The Killer started toward her with outstretched arms; but suddenly he
fell upon one knee before her, instead, and lifting her hand to his
lips kissed it more reverently than he could have kissed the hand of
his country's queen.

A rumble from Tantor brought the three, all jungle bred, to instant
alertness.  Tantor was looking toward the trees behind them, and as
their eyes followed his gaze the head and shoulders of a great ape
appeared amidst the foliage.  For a moment the creature eyed them, and
then from its throat rose a loud scream of recognition and of joy, and
a moment later the beast had leaped to the ground, followed by a score
of bulls like himself, and was waddling toward them, shouting in the
primordial tongue of the anthropoid:

"Tarzan has returned!  Tarzan, Lord of the Jungle!"

It was Akut, and instantly he commenced leaping and bounding about the
trio, uttering hideous shrieks and mouthings that to any other human
beings might have indicated the most ferocious rage; but these three
knew that the king of the apes was doing homage to a king greater than
himself.  In his wake leaped his shaggy bulls, vying with one another
as to which could spring the highest and which utter the most uncanny
sounds.

Korak laid his hand affectionately upon his father's shoulder.

"There is but one Tarzan," he said.  "There can never be another."


Two days later the three dropped from the trees on the edge of the
plain across which they could see the smoke rising from the bungalow
and the cook house chimneys.  Tarzan of the Apes had regained his
civilized clothing from the tree where he had hidden it, and as Korak
refused to enter the presence of his mother in the savage half-raiment
that he had worn so long and as Meriem would not leave him, for fear,
as she explained, that he would change his mind and run off into the
jungle again, the father went on ahead to the bungalow for horses and
clothes.

My Dear met him at the gate, her eyes filled with questioning and
sorrow, for she saw that Meriem was not with him.

"Where is she?" she asked, her voice trembling.  "Muviri told me that
she disobeyed your instructions and ran off into the jungle after you
had left them.  Oh, John, I cannot bear to lose her, too!" And Lady
Greystoke broke down and wept, as she pillowed her head upon the broad
breast where so often before she had found comfort in the great
tragedies of her life.

Lord Greystoke raised her head and looked down into her eyes, his own
smiling and filled with the light of happiness.

"What is it, John?" she cried.  "You have good news--do not keep me
waiting for it."

"I want to be quite sure that you can stand hearing the best news that
ever came to either of us," he said.

"Joy never kills," she cried.  "You have found--her?"  She could not
bring herself to hope for the impossible.

"Yes, Jane," he said, and his voice was husky with emotion; "I have
found her, and--HIM!"

"Where is he?  Where are they?" she demanded.

"Out there at the edge of the jungle.  He wouldn't come to you in his
savage leopard skin and his nakedness--he sent me to fetch him
civilized clothing."

She clapped her hands in ecstasy, and turned to run toward the
bungalow.  "Wait!" she cried over her shoulder.  "I have all his little
suits--I have saved them all.  I will bring one to you."

Tarzan laughed and called to her to stop.

"The only clothing on the place that will fit him," he said, "is
mine--if it isn't too small for him--your little boy has grown, Jane."

She laughed, too; she felt like laughing at everything, or at nothing.
The world was all love and happiness and joy once more--the world that
had been shrouded in the gloom of her great sorrow for so many years.
So great was her joy that for the moment she forgot the sad message
that awaited Meriem.  She called to Tarzan after he had ridden away to
prepare her for it, but he did not hear and rode on without knowing
himself what the event was to which his wife referred.

And so, an hour later, Korak, The Killer, rode home to his mother--the
mother whose image had never faded in his boyish heart--and found in
her arms and her eyes the love and forgiveness that he plead for.

And then the mother turned toward Meriem, an expression of pitying
sorrow erasing the happiness from her eyes.

"My little girl," she said, "in the midst of our happiness a great
sorrow awaits you--Mr. Baynes did not survive his wound."

The expression of sorrow in Meriem's eyes expressed only what she
sincerely felt; but it was not the sorrow of a woman bereft of her best
beloved.

"I am sorry," she said, quite simply.  "He would have done me a great
wrong; but he amply atoned before he died.  Once I thought that I loved
him.  At first it was only fascination for a type that was new to
me--then it was respect for a brave man who had the moral courage to
admit a sin and the physical courage to face death to right the wrong
he had committed.  But it was not love.  I did not know what love was
until I knew that Korak lived," and she turned toward The Killer with a
smile.

Lady Greystoke looked quickly up into the eyes of her son--the son who
one day would be Lord Greystoke.  No thought of the difference in the
stations of the girl and her boy entered her mind.  To her Meriem was
fit for a king.  She only wanted to know that Jack loved the little
Arab waif.  The look in his eyes answered the question in her heart,
and she threw her arms about them both and kissed them each a dozen
times.

"Now," she cried, "I shall really have a daughter!"

It was several weary marches to the nearest mission; but they only
waited at the farm a few days for rest and preparation for the great
event before setting out upon the journey, and after the marriage
ceremony had been performed they kept on to the coast to take passage
for England.  Those days were the most wonderful of Meriem's life.  She
had not dreamed even vaguely of the marvels that civilization held in
store for her.  The great ocean and the commodious steamship filled her
with awe.  The noise, and bustle and confusion of the English railway
station frightened her.

"If there was a good-sized tree at hand," she confided to Korak, "I
know that I should run to the very top of it in terror of my life."

"And make faces and throw twigs at the engine?" he laughed back.

"Poor old Numa," sighed the girl.  "What will he do without us?"

"Oh, there are others to tease him, my little Mangani," assured Korak.

The Greystoke town house quite took Meriem's breath away; but when
strangers were about none might guess that she had not been to the
manner born.

They had been home but a week when Lord Greystoke received a message
from his friend of many years, D'Arnot.

It was in the form of a letter of introduction brought by one General
Armand Jacot.  Lord Greystoke recalled the name, as who familiar with
modern French history would not, for Jacot was in reality the Prince de
Cadrenet--that intense republican who refused to use, even by courtesy,
a title that had belonged to his family for four hundred years.

"There is no place for princes in a republic," he was wont to say.

Lord Greystoke received the hawk-nosed, gray mustached soldier in his
library, and after a dozen words the two men had formed a mutual esteem
that was to endure through life.

"I have come to you," explained General Jacot, "because our dear
Admiral tells me that there is no one in all the world who is more
intimately acquainted with Central Africa than you.

"Let me tell you my story from the beginning.  Many years ago my little
daughter was stolen, presumably by Arabs, while I was serving with the
Foreign Legion in Algeria.  We did all that love and money and even
government resources could do to discover her; but all to no avail.
Her picture was published in the leading papers of every large city in
the world, yet never did we find a man or woman who ever had seen her
since the day she mysteriously disappeared.

"A week since there came to me in Paris a swarthy Arab, who called
himself Abdul Kamak.  He said that he had found my daughter and could
lead me to her.  I took him at once to Admiral d'Arnot, whom I knew had
traveled some in Central Africa.  The man's story led the Admiral to
believe that the place where the white girl the Arab supposed to be my
daughter was held in captivity was not far from your African estates,
and he advised that I come at once and call upon you--that you would
know if such a girl were in your neighborhood."

"What proof did the Arab bring that she was your daughter?" asked Lord
Greystoke.

"None," replied the other.  "That is why we thought best to consult you
before organizing an expedition.  The fellow had only an old photograph
of her on the back of which was pasted a newspaper cutting describing
her and offering a reward.  We feared that having found this somewhere
it had aroused his cupidity and led him to believe that in some way he
could obtain the reward, possibly by foisting upon us a white girl on
the chance that so many years had elapsed that we would not be able to
recognize an imposter as such."

"Have you the photograph with you?" asked Lord Greystoke.

The General drew an envelope from his pocket, took a yellowed
photograph from it and handed it to the Englishman.

Tears dimmed the old warrior's eyes as they fell again upon the
pictured features of his lost daughter.

Lord Greystoke examined the photograph for a moment.  A queer
expression entered his eyes.  He touched a bell at his elbow, and an
instant later a footman entered.

"Ask my son's wife if she will be so good as to come to the library,"
he directed.

The two men sat in silence.  General Jacot was too well bred to show in
any way the chagrin and disappointment he felt in the summary manner in
which Lord Greystoke had dismissed the subject of his call.  As soon as
the young lady had come and he had been presented he would make his
departure.  A moment later Meriem entered.

Lord Greystoke and General Jacot rose and faced her.  The Englishman
spoke no word of introduction--he wanted to mark the effect of the
first sight of the girl's face on the Frenchman, for he had a theory--a
heaven-born theory that had leaped into his mind the moment his eyes
had rested on the baby face of Jeanne Jacot.

General Jacot took one look at Meriem, then he turned toward Lord
Greystoke.

"How long have you known it?" he asked, a trifle accusingly.

"Since you showed me that photograph a moment ago," replied the
Englishman.

"It is she," said Jacot, shaking with suppressed emotion; "but she does
not recognize me--of course she could not."  Then he turned to Meriem.
"My child," he said, "I am your--"

But she interrupted him with a quick, glad cry, as she ran toward him
with outstretched arms.

"I know you!  I know you!" she cried.  "Oh, now I remember," and the
old man folded her in his arms.

Jack Clayton and his mother were summoned, and when the story had been
told them they were only glad that little Meriem had found a father and
a mother.

"And really you didn't marry an Arab waif after all," said Meriem.
"Isn't it fine!"

"You are fine," replied The Killer.  "I married my little Meriem, and I
don't care, for my part, whether she is an Arab, or just a little
Tarmangani."

"She is neither, my son," said General Armand Jacot.  "She is a
princess in her own right."









End of Project Gutenberg's The Son of Tarzan, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SON OF TARZAN ***

***** This file should be named 90.txt or 90.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/90/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿Project Gutenberg's Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar

Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs

Posting Date: June 23, 2008 [EBook #92]
Release Date: December, 1995
First Posted: November 1, 2001
Last updated: May 26, 2012

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN AND THE JEWELS OF OPAR ***




Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.










Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar


By

Edgar Rice Burroughs




Contents

CHAPTER

   1  Belgian and Arab
   2  On the Road to Opar
   3  The Call of the Jungle
   4  Prophecy and Fulfillment
   5  The Altar of the Flaming God
   6  The Arab Raid
   7  The Jewel-Room of Opar
   8  The Escape from Opar
   9  The Theft of the Jewels
  10  Achmet Zek Sees the Jewels
  11  Tarzan Becomes a Beast Again
  12  La Seeks Vengeance
  13  Condemned to Torture and Death
  14  A Priestess But Yet a Woman
  15  The Flight of Werper
  16  Tarzan Again Leads the Mangani
  17  The Deadly Peril of Jane Clayton
  18  The Fight For the Treasure
  19  Jane Clayton and The Beasts of the Jungle
  20  Jane Clayton Again a Prisoner
  21  The Flight to the Jungle
  22  Tarzan Recovers His Reason
  23  A Night of Terror
  24  Home




1

Belgian and Arab


Lieutenant Albert Werper had only the prestige of the name he had
dishonored to thank for his narrow escape from being cashiered.  At
first he had been humbly thankful, too, that they had sent him to this
Godforsaken Congo post instead of court-martialing him, as he had so
justly deserved; but now six months of the monotony, the frightful
isolation and the loneliness had wrought a change.  The young man
brooded continually over his fate.  His days were filled with morbid
self-pity, which eventually engendered in his weak and vacillating mind
a hatred for those who had sent him here--for the very men he had at
first inwardly thanked for saving him from the ignominy of degradation.

He regretted the gay life of Brussels as he never had regretted the
sins which had snatched him from that gayest of capitals, and as the
days passed he came to center his resentment upon the representative in
Congo land of the authority which had exiled him--his captain and
immediate superior.

This officer was a cold, taciturn man, inspiring little love in those
directly beneath him, yet respected and feared by the black soldiers of
his little command.

Werper was accustomed to sit for hours glaring at his superior as the
two sat upon the veranda of their common quarters, smoking their
evening cigarets in a silence which neither seemed desirous of
breaking.  The senseless hatred of the lieutenant grew at last into a
form of mania.  The captain's natural taciturnity he distorted into a
studied attempt to insult him because of his past shortcomings.  He
imagined that his superior held him in contempt, and so he chafed and
fumed inwardly until one evening his madness became suddenly homicidal.
He fingered the butt of the revolver at his hip, his eyes narrowed and
his brows contracted.  At last he spoke.

"You have insulted me for the last time!" he cried, springing to his
feet.  "I am an officer and a gentleman, and I shall put up with it no
longer without an accounting from you, you pig."

The captain, an expression of surprise upon his features, turned toward
his junior.  He had seen men before with the jungle madness upon
them--the madness of solitude and unrestrained brooding, and perhaps a
touch of fever.

He rose and extended his hand to lay it upon the other's shoulder.
Quiet words of counsel were upon his lips; but they were never spoken.
Werper construed his superior's action into an attempt to close with
him.  His revolver was on a level with the captain's heart, and the
latter had taken but a step when Werper pulled the trigger.  Without a
moan the man sank to the rough planking of the veranda, and as he fell
the mists that had clouded Werper's brain lifted, so that he saw
himself and the deed that he had done in the same light that those who
must judge him would see them.

He heard excited exclamations from the quarters of the soldiers and he
heard men running in his direction.  They would seize him, and if they
didn't kill him they would take him down the Congo to a point where a
properly ordered military tribunal would do so just as effectively,
though in a more regular manner.

Werper had no desire to die.  Never before had he so yearned for life
as in this moment that he had so effectively forfeited his right to
live.  The men were nearing him.  What was he to do?  He glanced about
as though searching for the tangible form of a legitimate excuse for
his crime; but he could find only the body of the man he had so
causelessly shot down.

In despair, he turned and fled from the oncoming soldiery.  Across the
compound he ran, his revolver still clutched tightly in his hand.  At
the gates a sentry halted him.  Werper did not pause to parley or to
exert the influence of his commission--he merely raised his weapon and
shot down the innocent black.  A moment later the fugitive had torn
open the gates and vanished into the blackness of the jungle, but not
before he had transferred the rifle and ammunition belts of the dead
sentry to his own person.

All that night Werper fled farther and farther into the heart of the
wilderness.  Now and again the voice of a lion brought him to a
listening halt; but with cocked and ready rifle he pushed ahead again,
more fearful of the human huntsmen in his rear than of the wild
carnivora ahead.

Dawn came at last, but still the man plodded on.  All sense of hunger
and fatigue were lost in the terrors of contemplated capture.  He could
think only of escape.  He dared not pause to rest or eat until there
was no further danger from pursuit, and so he staggered on until at
last he fell and could rise no more.  How long he had fled he did not
know, or try to know.  When he could flee no longer the knowledge that
he had reached his limit was hidden from him in the unconsciousness of
utter exhaustion.

And thus it was that Achmet Zek, the Arab, found him.  Achmet's
followers were for running a spear through the body of their hereditary
enemy; but Achmet would have it otherwise.  First he would question the
Belgian.  It were easier to question a man first and kill him
afterward, than kill him first and then question him.

So he had Lieutenant Albert Werper carried to his own tent, and there
slaves administered wine and food in small quantities until at last the
prisoner regained consciousness.  As he opened his eyes he saw the
faces of strange black men about him, and just outside the tent the
figure of an Arab.  Nowhere was the uniform of his soldiers to be seen.

The Arab turned and seeing the open eyes of the prisoner upon him,
entered the tent.

"I am Achmet Zek," he announced.  "Who are you, and what were you doing
in my country?  Where are your soldiers?"

Achmet Zek!  Werper's eyes went wide, and his heart sank.  He was in
the clutches of the most notorious of cut-throats--a hater of all
Europeans, especially those who wore the uniform of Belgium.  For years
the military forces of Belgian Congo had waged a fruitless war upon
this man and his followers--a war in which quarter had never been asked
nor expected by either side.

But presently in the very hatred of the man for Belgians, Werper saw a
faint ray of hope for himself.  He, too, was an outcast and an outlaw.
So far, at least, they possessed a common interest, and Werper decided
to play upon it for all that it might yield.

"I have heard of you," he replied, "and was searching for you.  My
people have turned against me.  I hate them.  Even now their soldiers
are searching for me, to kill me.  I knew that you would protect me
from them, for you, too, hate them.  In return I will take service with
you.  I am a trained soldier.  I can fight, and your enemies are my
enemies."

Achmet Zek eyed the European in silence.  In his mind he revolved many
thoughts, chief among which was that the unbeliever lied.  Of course
there was the chance that he did not lie, and if he told the truth then
his proposition was one well worthy of consideration, since fighting
men were never over plentiful--especially white men with the training
and knowledge of military matters that a European officer must possess.

Achmet Zek scowled and Werper's heart sank; but Werper did not know
Achmet Zek, who was quite apt to scowl where another would smile, and
smile where another would scowl.

"And if you have lied to me," said Achmet Zek, "I will kill you at any
time.  What return, other than your life, do you expect for your
services?"

"My keep only, at first," replied Werper.  "Later, if I am worth more,
we can easily reach an understanding." Werper's only desire at the
moment was to preserve his life.  And so the agreement was reached and
Lieutenant Albert Werper became a member of the ivory and slave raiding
band of the notorious Achmet Zek.

For months the renegade Belgian rode with the savage raider.  He fought
with a savage abandon, and a vicious cruelty fully equal to that of his
fellow desperadoes.  Achmet Zek watched his recruit with eagle eye, and
with a growing satisfaction which finally found expression in a greater
confidence in the man, and resulted in an increased independence of
action for Werper.

Achmet Zek took the Belgian into his confidence to a great extent, and
at last unfolded to him a pet scheme which the Arab had long fostered,
but which he never had found an opportunity to effect.  With the aid of
a European, however, the thing might be easily accomplished.  He
sounded Werper.

"You have heard of the man men call Tarzan?" he asked.

Werper nodded.  "I have heard of him; but I do not know him."

"But for him we might carry on our 'trading' in safety and with great
profit," continued the Arab.  "For years he has fought us, driving us
from the richest part of the country, harassing us, and arming the
natives that they may repel us when we come to 'trade.' He is very
rich.  If we could find some way to make him pay us many pieces of gold
we should not only be avenged upon him; but repaid for much that he has
prevented us from winning from the natives under his protection."

Werper withdrew a cigaret from a jeweled case and lighted it.

"And you have a plan to make him pay?" he asked.

"He has a wife," replied Achmet Zek, "whom men say is very beautiful.
She would bring a great price farther north, if we found it too
difficult to collect ransom money from this Tarzan."

Werper bent his head in thought.  Achmet Zek stood awaiting his reply.
What good remained in Albert Werper revolted at the thought of selling
a white woman into the slavery and degradation of a Moslem harem.  He
looked up at Achmet Zek.  He saw the Arab's eyes narrow, and he guessed
that the other had sensed his antagonism to the plan.  What would it
mean to Werper to refuse?  His life lay in the hands of this
semi-barbarian,  who esteemed the life of an unbeliever less highly
than that of a dog.  Werper loved life.  What was this woman to him,
anyway?  She was a European, doubtless, a member of organized society.
He was an outcast.  The hand of every white man was against him.  She
was his natural enemy, and if he refused to lend himself to her
undoing, Achmet Zek would have him killed.

"You hesitate," murmured the Arab.

"I was but weighing the chances of success," lied Werper, "and my
reward.  As a European I can gain admittance to their home and table.
You have no other with you who could do so much.  The risk will be
great.  I should be well paid, Achmet Zek."

A smile of relief passed over the raider's face.

"Well said, Werper," and Achmet Zek slapped his lieutenant upon the
shoulder.  "You should be well paid and you shall.  Now let us sit
together and plan how best the thing may be done," and the two men
squatted upon a soft rug beneath the faded silks of Achmet's once
gorgeous tent, and talked together in low voices well into the night.
Both were tall and bearded, and the exposure to sun and wind had given
an almost Arab hue to the European's complexion.  In every detail of
dress, too, he copied the fashions of his chief, so that outwardly he
was as much an Arab as the other.  It was late when he arose and
retired to his own tent.

The following day Werper spent in overhauling his Belgian uniform,
removing from it every vestige of evidence that might indicate its
military purposes.  From a heterogeneous collection of loot, Achmet Zek
procured a pith helmet and a European saddle, and from his black slaves
and followers a party of porters, askaris and tent boys to make up a
modest safari for a big game hunter.  At the head of this party Werper
set out from camp.




2

On the Road To Opar


It was two weeks later that John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, riding in
from a tour of inspection of his vast African estate, glimpsed the head
of a column of men crossing the plain that lay between his bungalow and
the forest to the north and west.

He reined in his horse and watched the little party as it emerged from
a concealing swale.  His keen eyes caught the reflection of the sun
upon the white helmet of a mounted man, and with the conviction that a
wandering European hunter was seeking his hospitality, he wheeled his
mount and rode slowly forward to meet the newcomer.

A half hour later he was mounting the steps leading to the veranda of
his bungalow, and introducing M. Jules Frecoult to Lady Greystoke.

"I was completely lost," M. Frecoult was explaining.  "My head man had
never before been in this part of the country and the guides who were
to have accompanied me from the last village we passed knew even less
of the country than we.  They finally deserted us two days since.  I am
very fortunate indeed to have stumbled so providentially upon succor.
I do not know what I should have done, had I not found you."

It was decided that Frecoult and his party should remain several days,
or until they were thoroughly rested, when Lord Greystoke would furnish
guides to lead them safely back into country with which Frecoult's head
man was supposedly familiar.

In his guise of a French gentleman of leisure, Werper found little
difficulty in deceiving his host and in ingratiating himself with both
Tarzan and Jane Clayton; but the longer he remained the less hopeful he
became of an easy accomplishment of his designs.

Lady Greystoke never rode alone at any great distance from the
bungalow, and the savage loyalty of the ferocious Waziri warriors who
formed a great part of Tarzan's followers seemed to preclude the
possibility of a successful attempt at forcible abduction, or of the
bribery of the Waziri themselves.

A week passed, and Werper was no nearer the fulfillment of his plan, in
so far as he could judge, than upon the day of his arrival, but at that
very moment something occurred which gave him renewed hope and set his
mind upon an even greater reward than a woman's ransom.

A runner had arrived at the bungalow with the weekly mail, and Lord
Greystoke had spent the afternoon in his study reading and answering
letters.  At dinner he seemed distraught, and early in the evening he
excused himself and retired, Lady Greystoke following him very soon
after.  Werper, sitting upon the veranda, could hear their voices in
earnest discussion, and having realized that something of unusual
moment was afoot, he quietly rose from his chair, and keeping well in
the shadow of the shrubbery growing profusely about the bungalow, made
his silent way to a point beneath the window of the room in which his
host and hostess slept.

Here he listened, and not without result, for almost the first words he
overheard filled him with excitement.  Lady Greystoke was speaking as
Werper came within hearing.

"I always feared for the stability of the company," she was saying;
"but it seems incredible that they should have failed for so enormous a
sum--unless there has been some dishonest manipulation."

"That is what I suspect," replied Tarzan; "but whatever the cause, the
fact remains that I have lost everything, and there is nothing for it
but to return to Opar and get more."

"Oh, John," cried Lady Greystoke, and Werper could feel the shudder
through her voice, "is there no other way?  I cannot bear to think of
you returning to that frightful city.  I would rather live in poverty
always than to have you risk the hideous dangers of Opar."

"You need have no fear," replied Tarzan, laughing.  "I am pretty well
able to take care of myself, and were I not, the Waziri who will
accompany me will see that no harm befalls me."

"They ran away from Opar once, and left you to your fate," she reminded
him.

"They will not do it again," he answered.  "They were very much ashamed
of themselves, and were coming back when I met them."

"But there must be some other way," insisted the woman.

"There is no other way half so easy to obtain another fortune, as to go
to the treasure vaults of Opar and bring it away," he replied.  "I
shall be very careful, Jane, and the chances are that the inhabitants
of Opar will never know that I have been there again and despoiled them
of another portion of the treasure, the very existence of which they
are as ignorant of as they would be of its value."

The finality in his tone seemed to assure Lady Greystoke that further
argument was futile, and so she abandoned the subject.

Werper remained, listening, for a short time, and then, confident that
he had overheard all that was necessary and fearing discovery, returned
to the veranda, where he smoked numerous cigarets in rapid succession
before retiring.

The following morning at breakfast, Werper announced his intention of
making an early departure, and asked Tarzan's permission to hunt big
game in the Waziri country on his way out--permission which Lord
Greystoke readily granted.

The Belgian consumed two days in completing his preparations, but
finally got away with his safari, accompanied by a single Waziri guide
whom Lord Greystoke had loaned him.  The party made but a single short
march when Werper simulated illness, and announced his intention of
remaining where he was until he had fully recovered.  As they had gone
but a short distance from the Greystoke bungalow, Werper dismissed the
Waziri guide, telling the warrior that he would send for him when he
was able to proceed.  The Waziri gone, the Belgian summoned one of
Achmet Zek's trusted blacks to his tent, and dispatched him to watch
for the departure of Tarzan, returning immediately to advise Werper of
the event and the direction taken by the Englishman.

The Belgian did not have long to wait, for the following day his
emissary returned with word that Tarzan and a party of fifty Waziri
warriors had set out toward the southeast early in the morning.

Werper called his head man to him, after writing a long letter to
Achmet Zek.  This letter he handed to the head man.

"Send a runner at once to Achmet Zek with this," he instructed the head
man.  "Remain here in camp awaiting further instructions from him or
from me.  If any come from the bungalow of the Englishman, tell them
that I am very ill within my tent and can see no one.  Now, give me six
porters and six askaris--the strongest and bravest of the safari--and I
will march after the Englishman and discover where his gold is hidden."

And so it was that as Tarzan, stripped to the loin cloth and armed
after the primitive fashion he best loved, led his loyal Waziri toward
the dead city of Opar, Werper, the renegade, haunted his trail through
the long, hot days, and camped close behind him by night.

And as they marched, Achmet Zek rode with his entire following
southward toward the Greystoke farm.

To Tarzan of the Apes the expedition was in the nature of a holiday
outing.  His civilization was at best but an outward veneer which he
gladly peeled off with his uncomfortable European clothes whenever any
reasonable pretext presented itself.  It was a woman's love which kept
Tarzan even to the semblance of civilization--a condition for which
familiarity had bred contempt.  He hated the shams and the hypocrisies
of it and with the clear vision of an unspoiled mind he had penetrated
to the rotten core of the heart of the thing--the cowardly greed for
peace and ease and the safe-guarding of property rights.  That the fine
things of life--art, music and literature--had thriven upon such
enervating ideals he strenuously denied, insisting, rather, that they
had endured in spite of civilization.

"Show me the fat, opulent coward," he was wont to say, "who ever
originated a beautiful ideal.  In the clash of arms, in the battle for
survival, amid hunger and death and danger, in the face of God as
manifested in the display of Nature's most terrific forces, is born all
that is finest and best in the human heart and mind."

And so Tarzan always came back to Nature in the spirit of a lover
keeping a long deferred tryst after a period behind prison walls.  His
Waziri, at marrow, were more civilized than he.  They cooked their meat
before they ate it and they shunned many articles of food as unclean
that Tarzan had eaten with gusto all his life and so insidious is the
virus of hypocrisy that even the stalwart ape-man hesitated to give
rein to his natural longings before them.  He ate burnt flesh when he
would have preferred it raw and unspoiled, and he brought down game
with arrow or spear when he would far rather have leaped upon it from
ambush and sunk his strong teeth in its jugular; but at last the call
of the milk of the savage mother that had suckled him in infancy rose
to an insistent demand--he craved the hot blood of a fresh kill and his
muscles yearned to pit themselves against the savage jungle in the
battle for existence that had been his sole birthright for the first
twenty years of his life.




3

The Call of the Jungle


Moved by these vague yet all-powerful urgings the ape-man lay awake one
night in the little thorn boma that protected, in a way, his party from
the depredations of the great carnivora of the jungle.  A single
warrior stood sleepy guard beside the fire that yellow eyes out of the
darkness beyond the camp made imperative.  The moans and the coughing
of the big cats mingled with the myriad noises of the lesser denizens
of the jungle to fan the savage flame in the breast of this savage
English lord.  He tossed upon his bed of grasses, sleepless, for an
hour and then he rose, noiseless as a wraith, and while the Waziri's
back was turned, vaulted the boma wall in the face of the flaming eyes,
swung silently into a great tree and was gone.

For a time in sheer exuberance of animal spirit he raced swiftly
through the middle terrace, swinging perilously across wide spans from
one jungle giant to the next, and then he clambered upward to the
swaying, lesser boughs of the upper terrace where the moon shone full
upon him and the air was stirred by little breezes and death lurked
ready in each frail branch.  Here he paused and raised his face to
Goro, the moon.  With uplifted arm he stood, the cry of the bull ape
quivering upon his lips, yet he remained silent lest he arouse his
faithful Waziri who were all too familiar with the hideous challenge of
their master.

And then he went on more slowly and with greater stealth and caution,
for now Tarzan of the Apes was seeking a kill.  Down to the ground he
came in the utter blackness of the close-set boles and the overhanging
verdure of the jungle. He stooped from time to time and put his nose
close to earth.  He sought and found a wide game trail and at last his
nostrils were rewarded with the scent of the fresh spoor of Bara, the
deer.  Tarzan's mouth watered and a low growl escaped his patrician
lips.  Sloughed from him was the last vestige of artificial caste--once
again he was the primeval hunter--the first man--the highest caste type
of the human race.  Up wind he followed the elusive spoor with a sense
of perception so transcending that of ordinary man as to be
inconceivable to us.  Through counter currents of the heavy stench of
meat eaters he traced the trail of Bara; the sweet and cloying stink of
Horta, the boar, could not drown his quarry's scent--the permeating,
mellow musk of the deer's foot.

Presently the body scent of the deer told Tarzan that his prey was
close at hand.  It sent him into the trees again--into the lower
terrace where he could watch the ground below and catch with ears and
nose the first intimation of actual contact with his quarry.  Nor was
it long before the ape-man came upon Bara standing alert at the edge of
a moon-bathed clearing.  Noiselessly Tarzan crept through the trees
until he was directly over the deer.  In the ape-man's right hand was
the long hunting knife of his father and in his heart the blood lust of
the carnivore.  Just for an instant he poised above the unsuspecting
Bara and then he launched himself downward upon the sleek back.  The
impact of his weight carried the deer to its knees and before the
animal could regain its feet the knife had found its heart.  As Tarzan
rose upon the body of his kill to scream forth his hideous victory cry
into the face of the moon the wind carried to his nostrils something
which froze him to statuesque immobility and silence.  His savage eyes
blazed into the direction from which the wind had borne down the
warning to him and a moment later the grasses at one side of the
clearing parted and Numa, the lion, strode majestically into view.  His
yellow-green eyes were fastened upon Tarzan as he halted just within
the clearing and glared enviously at the successful hunter, for Numa
had had no luck this night.

From the lips of the ape-man broke a rumbling growl of warning.  Numa
answered but he did not advance.  Instead he stood waving his tail
gently to and fro, and presently Tarzan squatted upon his kill and cut
a generous portion from a hind quarter.  Numa eyed him with growing
resentment and rage as, between mouthfuls, the ape-man growled out his
savage warnings.  Now this particular lion had never before come in
contact with Tarzan of the Apes and he was much mystified.  Here was
the appearance and the scent of a man-thing and Numa had tasted of
human flesh and learned that though not the most palatable it was
certainly by far the easiest to secure, yet there was that in the
bestial growls of the strange creature which reminded him of formidable
antagonists and gave him pause, while his hunger and the odor of the
hot flesh of Bara goaded him almost to madness.  Always Tarzan watched
him, guessing what was passing in the little brain of the carnivore and
well it was that he did watch him, for at last Numa could stand it no
longer.  His tail shot suddenly erect and at the same instant the wary
ape-man, knowing all too well what the signal portended, grasped the
remainder of the deer's hind quarter between his teeth and leaped into
a nearby tree as Numa charged him with all the speed and a sufficient
semblance of the weight of an express train.

Tarzan's retreat was no indication that he felt fear.  Jungle life is
ordered along different lines than ours and different standards
prevail.  Had Tarzan been famished he would, doubtless, have stood his
ground and met the lion's charge.  He had done the thing before upon
more than one occasion, just as in the past he had charged lions
himself; but tonight he was far from famished and in the hind quarter
he had carried off with him was more raw flesh than he could eat; yet
it was with no equanimity that he looked down upon Numa rending the
flesh of Tarzan's kill.  The presumption of this strange Numa must be
punished!  And forthwith Tarzan set out to make life miserable for the
big cat.  Close by were many trees bearing large, hard fruits and to
one of these the ape-man swung with the agility of a squirrel.  Then
commenced a bombardment which brought forth earthshaking roars from
Numa.  One after another as rapidly as he could gather and hurl them,
Tarzan pelted the hard fruit down upon the lion.  It was impossible for
the tawny cat to eat under that hail of missiles--he could but roar and
growl and dodge and eventually he was driven away entirely from the
carcass of Bara, the deer.  He went roaring and resentful; but in the
very center of the clearing his voice was suddenly hushed and Tarzan
saw the great head lower and flatten out, the body crouch and the long
tail quiver, as the beast slunk cautiously toward the trees upon the
opposite side.

Immediately Tarzan was alert.  He lifted his head and sniffed the slow,
jungle breeze.  What was it that had attracted Numa's attention and
taken him soft-footed and silent away from the scene of his
discomfiture?  Just as the lion disappeared among the trees beyond the
clearing Tarzan caught upon the down-coming wind the explanation of his
new interest--the scent spoor of man was wafted strongly to the
sensitive nostrils.  Caching the remainder of the deer's hind quarter
in the crotch of a tree the ape-man wiped his greasy palms upon his
naked thighs and swung off in pursuit of Numa.  A broad, well-beaten
elephant path led into the forest from the clearing.  Parallel to this
slunk Numa, while above him Tarzan moved through the trees, the shadow
of a wraith.  The savage cat and the savage man saw Numa's quarry
almost simultaneously, though both had known before it came within the
vision of their eyes that it was a black man.  Their sensitive nostrils
had told them this much and Tarzan's had told him that the scent spoor
was that of a stranger--old and a male, for race and sex and age each
has its own distinctive scent.  It was an old man that made his way
alone through the gloomy jungle, a wrinkled, dried up, little old man
hideously scarred and tattooed and strangely garbed, with the skin of a
hyena about his shoulders and the dried head mounted upon his grey
pate.  Tarzan recognized the ear-marks of the witch-doctor and awaited
Numa's charge with a feeling of pleasurable anticipation, for the
ape-man had no love for witch-doctors; but in the instant that Numa did
charge, the white man suddenly recalled that the lion had stolen his
kill a few minutes before and that revenge is sweet.

The first intimation the black man had that he was in danger was the
crash of twigs as Numa charged through the bushes into the game trail
not twenty yards behind him.  Then he turned to see a huge, black-maned
lion racing toward him and even as he turned, Numa seized him.  At the
same instant the ape-man dropped from an overhanging limb full upon the
lion's back and as he alighted he plunged his knife into the tawny side
behind the left shoulder, tangled the fingers of his right hand in the
long mane, buried his teeth in Numa's neck and wound his powerful legs
about the beast's torso.  With a roar of pain and rage, Numa reared up
and fell backward upon the ape-man; but still the mighty man-thing
clung to his hold and repeatedly the long knife plunged rapidly into
his side.  Over and over rolled Numa, the lion, clawing and biting at
the air, roaring and growling horribly in savage attempt to reach the
thing upon its back.  More than once was Tarzan almost brushed from his
hold.  He was battered and bruised and covered with blood from Numa and
dirt from the trail, yet not for an instant did he lessen the ferocity
of his mad attack nor his grim hold upon the back of his antagonist.
To have loosened for an instant his grip there, would have been to
bring him within reach of those tearing talons or rending fangs, and
have ended forever the grim career of this jungle-bred English lord.
Where he had fallen beneath the spring of the lion the witch-doctor
lay, torn and bleeding, unable to drag himself away and watched the
terrific battle between these two lords of the jungle.  His sunken eyes
glittered and his wrinkled lips moved over toothless gums as he mumbled
weird incantations to the demons of his cult.

For a time he felt no doubt as to the outcome--the strange white man
must certainly succumb to terrible Simba--whoever heard of a lone man
armed only with a knife slaying so mighty a beast!  Yet presently the
old black man's eyes went wider and he commenced to have his doubts and
misgivings.  What wonderful sort of creature was this that battled with
Simba and held his own despite the mighty muscles of the king of beasts
and slowly there dawned in those sunken eyes, gleaming so brightly from
the scarred and wrinkled face, the light of a dawning recollection.
Gropingly backward into the past reached the fingers of memory, until
at last they seized upon a faint picture, faded and yellow with the
passing years.  It was the picture of a lithe, white-skinned youth
swinging through the trees in company with a band of huge apes, and the
old eyes blinked and a great fear came into them--the superstitious
fear of one who believes in ghosts and spirits and demons.

And came the time once more when the witch-doctor no longer doubted the
outcome of the duel, yet his first judgment was reversed, for now he
knew that the jungle god would slay Simba and the old black was even
more terrified of his own impending fate at the hands of the victor
than he had been by the sure and sudden death which the triumphant lion
would have meted out to him.  He saw the lion weaken from loss of
blood.  He saw the mighty limbs tremble and stagger and at last he saw
the beast sink down to rise no more.  He saw the forest god or demon
rise from the vanquished foe, and placing a foot upon the still
quivering carcass, raise his face to the moon and bay out a hideous cry
that froze the ebbing blood in the veins of the witch-doctor.




4

Prophecy and Fulfillment


Then Tarzan turned his attention to the man.  He had not slain Numa to
save the Negro--he had merely done it in revenge upon the lion; but now
that he saw the old man lying helpless and dying before him something
akin to pity touched his savage heart.  In his youth he would have
slain the witch-doctor without the slightest compunction; but
civilization had had its softening effect upon him even as it does upon
the nations and races which it touches, though it had not yet gone far
enough with Tarzan to render him either cowardly or effeminate.  He saw
an old man suffering and dying, and he stooped and felt of his wounds
and stanched the flow of blood.

"Who are you?" asked the old man in a trembling voice.

"I am Tarzan--Tarzan of the Apes," replied the ape-man and not without
a greater touch of pride than he would have said, "I am John Clayton,
Lord Greystoke."

The witch-doctor shook convulsively and closed his eyes.  When he
opened them again there was in them a resignation to whatever horrible
fate awaited him at the hands of this feared demon of the woods.  "Why
do you not kill me?" he asked.

"Why should I kill you?" inquired Tarzan.  "You have not harmed me, and
anyway you are already dying.  Numa, the lion, has killed you."

"You would not kill me?" Surprise and incredulity were in the tones of
the quavering old voice.

"I would save you if I could," replied Tarzan, "but that cannot be
done.  Why did you think I would kill you?"

For a moment the old man was silent.  When he spoke it was evidently
after some little effort to muster his courage.  "I knew you of old,"
he said, "when you ranged the jungle in the country of Mbonga, the
chief.  I was already a witch-doctor when you slew Kulonga and the
others, and when you robbed our huts and our poison pot.  At first I
did not remember you; but at last I did--the white-skinned ape that
lived with the hairy apes and made life miserable in the village of
Mbonga, the chief--the forest god--the Munango-Keewati for whom we set
food outside our gates and who came and ate it.  Tell me before I
die--are you man or devil?"

Tarzan laughed.  "I am a man," he said.

The old fellow sighed and shook his head.  "You have tried to save me
from Simba," he said.  "For that I shall reward you.  I am a great
witch-doctor.  Listen to me, white man!  I see bad days ahead of you.
It is writ in my own blood which I have smeared upon my palm.  A god
greater even than you will rise up and strike you down.  Turn back,
Munango-Keewati!  Turn back before it is too late.  Danger lies ahead
of you and danger lurks behind; but greater is the danger before.  I
see--" He paused and drew a long, gasping breath.  Then he crumpled
into a little, wrinkled heap and died.  Tarzan wondered what else he
had seen.

It was very late when the ape-man re-entered the boma and lay down
among his black warriors.  None had seen him go and none saw him
return.  He thought about the warning of the old witch-doctor before he
fell asleep and he thought of it again after he awoke; but he did not
turn back for he was unafraid, though had he known what lay in store
for one he loved most in all the world he would have flown through the
trees to her side and allowed the gold of Opar to remain forever hidden
in its forgotten storehouse.

Behind him that morning another white man pondered something he had
heard during the night and very nearly did he give up his project and
turn back upon his trail.  It was Werper, the murderer, who in the
still of the night had heard far away upon the trail ahead of him a
sound that had filled his cowardly soul with terror--a sound such as he
never before had heard in all his life, nor dreamed that such a
frightful thing could emanate from the lungs of a God-created creature.
He had heard the victory cry of the bull ape as Tarzan had screamed it
forth into the face of Goro, the moon, and he had trembled then and
hidden his face; and now in the broad light of a new day he trembled
again as he recalled it, and would have turned back from the nameless
danger the echo of that frightful sound seemed to portend, had he not
stood in even greater fear of Achmet Zek, his master.

And so Tarzan of the Apes forged steadily ahead toward Opar's ruined
ramparts and behind him slunk Werper, jackal-like, and only God knew
what lay in store for each.

At the edge of the desolate valley, overlooking the golden domes and
minarets of Opar, Tarzan halted.  By night he would go alone to the
treasure vault, reconnoitering, for he had determined that caution
should mark his every move upon this expedition.

With the coming of night he set forth, and Werper, who had scaled the
cliffs alone behind the ape-man's party, and hidden through the day
among the rough boulders of the mountain top, slunk stealthily after
him.  The boulder-strewn plain between the valley's edge and the mighty
granite kopje, outside the city's walls, where lay the entrance to the
passage-way leading to the treasure vault, gave the Belgian ample cover
as he followed Tarzan toward Opar.

He saw the giant ape-man swing himself nimbly up the face of the great
rock.  Werper, clawing fearfully during the perilous ascent, sweating
in terror, almost palsied by fear, but spurred on by avarice, following
upward, until at last he stood upon the summit of the rocky hill.

Tarzan was nowhere in sight.  For a time Werper hid behind one of the
lesser boulders that were scattered over the top of the hill, but,
seeing or hearing nothing of the Englishman, he crept from his place of
concealment to undertake a systematic search of his surroundings, in
the hope that he might discover the location of the treasure in ample
time to make his escape before Tarzan returned, for it was the
Belgian's desire merely to locate the gold, that, after Tarzan had
departed, he might come in safety with his followers and carry away as
much as he could transport.

He found the narrow cleft leading downward into the heart of the kopje
along well-worn, granite steps.  He advanced quite to the dark mouth of
the tunnel into which the runway disappeared; but here he halted,
fearing to enter, lest he meet Tarzan returning.

The ape-man, far ahead of him, groped his way along the rocky passage,
until he came to the ancient wooden door.  A moment later he stood
within the treasure chamber, where, ages since, long-dead hands had
ranged the lofty rows of precious ingots for the rulers of that great
continent which now lies submerged beneath the waters of the Atlantic.

No sound broke the stillness of the subterranean vault.  There was no
evidence that another had discovered the forgotten wealth since last
the ape-man had visited its hiding place.

Satisfied, Tarzan turned and retraced his steps toward the summit of
the kopje.  Werper, from the concealment of a jutting, granite
shoulder, watched him pass up from the shadows of the stairway and
advance toward the edge of the hill which faced the rim of the valley
where the Waziri awaited the signal of their master.  Then Werper,
slipping stealthily from his hiding place, dropped into the somber
darkness of the entrance and disappeared.

Tarzan, halting upon the kopje's edge, raised his voice in the
thunderous roar of a lion.  Twice, at regular intervals, he repeated
the call, standing in attentive silence for several minutes after the
echoes of the third call had died away.  And then, from far across the
valley, faintly, came an answering roar--once, twice, thrice.  Basuli,
the Waziri chieftain, had heard and replied.

Tarzan again made his way toward the treasure vault, knowing that in a
few hours his blacks would be with him, ready to bear away another
fortune in the strangely shaped, golden ingots of Opar.  In the
meantime he would carry as much of the precious metal to the summit of
the kopje as he could.

Six trips he made in the five hours before Basuli reached the kopje,
and at the end of that time he had transported forty-eight ingots to
the edge of the great boulder, carrying upon each trip a load which
might well have staggered two ordinary men, yet his giant frame showed
no evidence of fatigue, as he helped to raise his ebon warriors to the
hill top with the rope that had been brought for the purpose.

Six times he had returned to the treasure chamber, and six times
Werper, the Belgian, had cowered in the black shadows at the far end of
the long vault.  Once again came the ape-man, and this time there came
with him fifty fighting men, turning porters for love of the only
creature in the world who might command of their fierce and haughty
natures such menial service.  Fifty-two more ingots passed out of the
vaults, making the total of one hundred which Tarzan intended taking
away with him.

As the last of the Waziri filed from the chamber, Tarzan turned back
for a last glimpse of the fabulous wealth upon which his two inroads
had made no appreciable impression.  Before he extinguished the single
candle he had brought with him for the purpose, and the flickering
light of which had cast the first alleviating rays into the
impenetrable darkness of the buried chamber, that it had known for the
countless ages since it had lain forgotten of man, Tarzan's mind
reverted to that first occasion upon which he had entered the treasure
vault, coming upon it by chance as he fled from the pits beneath the
temple, where he had been hidden by La, the High Priestess of the Sun
Worshipers.

He recalled the scene within the temple when he had lain stretched upon
the sacrificial altar, while La, with high-raised dagger, stood above
him, and the rows of priests and priestesses awaited, in the ecstatic
hysteria of fanaticism, the first gush of their victim's warm blood,
that they might fill their golden goblets and drink to the glory of
their Flaming God.

The brutal and bloody interruption by Tha, the mad priest, passed
vividly before the ape-man's recollective eyes, the flight of the
votaries before the insane blood lust of the hideous creature, the
brutal attack upon La, and his own part of the grim tragedy when he had
battled with the infuriated Oparian and left him dead at the feet of
the priestess he would have profaned.

This and much more passed through Tarzan's memory as he stood gazing at
the long tiers of dull-yellow metal.  He wondered if La still ruled the
temples of the ruined city whose crumbling walls rose upon the very
foundations about him.  Had she finally been forced into a union with
one of her grotesque priests?  It seemed a hideous fate, indeed, for
one so beautiful.  With a shake of his head, Tarzan stepped to the
flickering candle, extinguished its feeble rays and turned toward the
exit.

Behind him the spy waited for him to be gone.  He had learned the
secret for which he had come, and now he could return at his leisure to
his waiting followers, bring them to the treasure vault and carry away
all the gold that they could stagger under.

The Waziri had reached the outer end of the tunnel, and were winding
upward toward the fresh air and the welcome starlight of the kopje's
summit, before Tarzan shook off the detaining hand of reverie and
started slowly after them.

Once again, and, he thought, for the last time, he closed the massive
door of the treasure room.  In the darkness behind him Werper rose and
stretched his cramped muscles.  He stretched forth a hand and lovingly
caressed a golden ingot on the nearest tier.  He raised it from its
immemorial resting place and weighed it in his hands.  He clutched it
to his bosom in an ecstasy of avarice.

Tarzan dreamed of the happy homecoming which lay before him, of dear
arms about his neck, and a soft cheek pressed to his; but there rose to
dispel that dream the memory of the old witch-doctor and his warning.

And then, in the span of a few brief seconds, the hopes of both these
men were shattered.  The one forgot even his greed in the panic of
terror--the other was plunged into total forgetfulness of the past by a
jagged fragment of rock which gashed a deep cut upon his head.




5

The Altar of the Flaming God


It was at the moment that Tarzan turned from the closed door to pursue
his way to the outer world.  The thing came without warning.  One
instant all was quiet and stability--the next, and the world rocked,
the tortured sides of the narrow passageway split and crumbled, great
blocks of granite, dislodged from the ceiling, tumbled into the narrow
way, choking it, and the walls bent inward upon the wreckage.  Beneath
the blow of a fragment of the roof, Tarzan staggered back against the
door to the treasure room, his weight pushed it open and his body
rolled inward upon the floor.

In the great apartment where the treasure lay less damage was wrought
by the earthquake.  A few ingots toppled from the higher tiers, a
single piece of the rocky ceiling splintered off and crashed downward
to the floor, and the walls cracked, though they did not collapse.

There was but the single shock, no other followed to complete the
damage undertaken by the first.  Werper, thrown to his length by the
suddenness and violence of the disturbance, staggered to his feet when
he found himself unhurt.  Groping his way toward the far end of the
chamber, he sought the candle which Tarzan had left stuck in its own
wax upon the protruding end of an ingot.

By striking numerous matches the Belgian at last found what he sought,
and when, a moment later, the sickly rays relieved the Stygian darkness
about him, he breathed a nervous sigh of relief, for the impenetrable
gloom had accentuated the terrors of his situation.

As they became accustomed to the light the man turned his eyes toward
the door--his one thought now was of escape from this frightful
tomb--and as he did so he saw the body of the naked giant lying
stretched upon the floor just within the doorway.  Werper drew back in
sudden fear of detection; but a second glance convinced him that the
Englishman was dead.  From a great gash in the man's head a pool of
blood had collected upon the concrete floor.

Quickly, the Belgian leaped over the prostrate form of his erstwhile
host, and without a thought of succor for the man in whom, for aught he
knew, life still remained, he bolted for the passageway and safety.

But his renewed hopes were soon dashed.  Just beyond the doorway he
found the passage completely clogged and choked by impenetrable masses
of shattered rock.  Once more he turned and re-entered the treasure
vault.  Taking the candle from its place he commenced a systematic
search of the apartment, nor had he gone far before he discovered
another door in the opposite end of the room, a door which gave upon
creaking hinges to the weight of his body.  Beyond the door lay another
narrow passageway.  Along this Werper made his way, ascending a flight
of stone steps to another corridor twenty feet above the level of the
first.  The flickering candle lighted the way before him, and a moment
later he was thankful for the possession of this crude and antiquated
luminant, which, a few hours before he might have looked upon with
contempt, for it showed him, just in time, a yawning pit, apparently
terminating the tunnel he was traversing.

Before him was a circular shaft.  He held the candle above it and
peered downward.  Below him, at a great distance, he saw the light
reflected back from the surface of a pool of water.  He had come upon a
well.  He raised the candle above his head and peered across the black
void, and there upon the opposite side he saw the continuation of the
tunnel; but how was he to span the gulf?

As he stood there measuring the distance to the opposite side and
wondering if he dared venture so great a leap, there broke suddenly
upon his startled ears a piercing scream which diminished gradually
until it ended in a series of dismal moans.  The voice seemed partly
human, yet so hideous that it might well have emanated from the
tortured throat of a lost soul, writhing in the fires of hell.

The Belgian shuddered and looked fearfully upward, for the scream had
seemed to come from above him.  As he looked he saw an opening far
overhead, and a patch of sky pinked with brilliant stars.

His half-formed intention to call for help was expunged by the
terrifying cry--where such a voice lived, no human creatures could
dwell.  He dared not reveal himself to whatever inhabitants dwelt in
the place above him.  He cursed himself for a fool that he had ever
embarked upon such a mission.  He wished himself safely back in the
camp of Achmet Zek, and would almost have embraced an opportunity to
give himself up to the military authorities of the Congo if by so doing
he might be rescued from the frightful predicament in which he now was.

He listened fearfully, but the cry was not repeated, and at last
spurred to desperate means, he gathered himself for the leap across the
chasm.  Going back twenty paces, he took a running start, and at the
edge of the well, leaped upward and outward in an attempt to gain the
opposite side.

In his hand he clutched the sputtering candle, and as he took the leap
the rush of air extinguished it.  In utter darkness he flew through
space, clutching outward for a hold should his feet miss the invisible
ledge.

He struck the edge of the door of the opposite terminus of the rocky
tunnel with his knees, slipped backward, clutched desperately for a
moment, and at last hung half within and half without the opening; but
he was safe.  For several minutes he dared not move; but clung, weak
and sweating, where he lay.  At last, cautiously, he drew himself well
within the tunnel, and again he lay at full length upon the floor,
fighting to regain control of his shattered nerves.

When his knees struck the edge of the tunnel he had dropped the candle.
Presently, hoping against hope that it had fallen upon the floor of the
passageway, rather than back into the depths of the well, he rose upon
all fours and commenced a diligent search for the little tallow
cylinder, which now seemed infinitely more precious to him than all the
fabulous wealth of the hoarded ingots of Opar.

And when, at last, he found it, he clasped it to him and sank back
sobbing and exhausted.  For many minutes he lay trembling and broken;
but finally he drew himself to a sitting posture, and taking a match
from his pocket, lighted the stump of the candle which remained to him.
With the light he found it easier to regain control of his nerves, and
presently he was again making his way along the tunnel in search of an
avenue of escape.  The horrid cry that had come down to him from above
through the ancient well-shaft still haunted him, so that he trembled
in terror at even the sounds of his own cautious advance.

He had gone forward but a short distance, when, to his chagrin, a wall
of masonry barred his farther progress, closing the tunnel completely
from top to bottom and from side to side.  What could it mean?  Werper
was an educated and intelligent man.  His military training had taught
him to use his mind for the purpose for which it was intended.  A blind
tunnel such as this was senseless.  It must continue beyond the wall.
Someone, at some time in the past, had had it blocked for an unknown
purpose of his own.  The man fell to examining the masonry by the light
of his candle.  To his delight he discovered that the thin blocks of
hewn stone of which it was constructed were fitted in loosely without
mortar or cement.  He tugged upon one of them, and to his joy found
that it was easily removable.  One after another he pulled out the
blocks until he had opened an aperture large enough to admit his body,
then he crawled through into a large, low chamber.  Across this another
door barred his way; but this, too, gave before his efforts, for it was
not barred.  A long, dark corridor showed before him, but before he had
followed it far, his candle burned down until it scorched his fingers.
With an oath he dropped it to the floor, where it sputtered for a
moment and went out.

Now he was in total darkness, and again terror rode heavily astride his
neck.  What further pitfalls and dangers lay ahead he could not guess;
but that he was as far as ever from liberty he was quite willing to
believe, so depressing is utter absence of light to one in unfamiliar
surroundings.

Slowly he groped his way along, feeling with his hands upon the
tunnel's walls, and cautiously with his feet ahead of him upon the
floor before he could take a single forward step.  How long he crept on
thus he could not guess; but at last, feeling that the tunnel's length
was interminable, and exhausted by his efforts, by terror, and loss of
sleep, he determined to lie down and rest before proceeding farther.

When he awoke there was no change in the surrounding blackness.  He
might have slept a second or a day--he could not know; but that he had
slept for some time was attested by the fact that he felt refreshed and
hungry.

Again he commenced his groping advance; but this time he had gone but a
short distance when he emerged into a room, which was lighted through
an opening in the ceiling, from which a flight of concrete steps led
downward to the floor of the chamber.

Above him, through the aperture, Werper could see sunlight glancing
from massive columns, which were twined about by clinging vines.  He
listened; but he heard no sound other than the soughing of the wind
through leafy branches, the hoarse cries of birds, and the chattering
of monkeys.

Boldly he ascended the stairway, to find himself in a circular court.
Just before him stood a stone altar, stained with rusty-brown
discolorations.  At the time Werper gave no thought to an explanation
of these stains--later their origin became all too hideously apparent
to him.

Beside the opening in the floor, just behind the altar, through which
he had entered the court from the subterranean chamber below, the
Belgian discovered several doors leading from the enclosure upon the
level of the floor.  Above, and circling the courtyard, was a series of
open balconies.  Monkeys scampered about the deserted ruins, and gaily
plumaged birds flitted in and out among the columns and the galleries
far above; but no sign of human presence was discernible.  Werper felt
relieved.  He sighed, as though a great weight had been lifted from his
shoulders.  He took a step toward one of the exits, and then he halted,
wide-eyed in astonishment and terror, for almost at the same instant a
dozen doors opened in the courtyard wall and a horde of frightful men
rushed in upon him.

They were the priests of the Flaming God of Opar--the same, shaggy,
knotted, hideous little men who had dragged Jane Clayton to the
sacrificial altar at this very spot years before.  Their long arms,
their short and crooked legs, their close-set, evil eyes, and their
low, receding foreheads gave them a bestial appearance that sent a
qualm of paralyzing fright through the shaken nerves of the Belgian.

With a scream he turned to flee back into the lesser terrors of the
gloomy corridors and apartments from which he had just emerged, but the
frightful men anticipated his intentions.  They blocked the way; they
seized him, and though he fell, groveling upon his knees before them,
begging for his life, they bound him and hurled him to the floor of the
inner temple.

The rest was but a repetition of what Tarzan and Jane Clayton had
passed through.  The priestesses came, and with them La, the High
Priestess.  Werper was raised and laid across the altar.  Cold sweat
exuded from his every pore as La raised the cruel, sacrificial knife
above him.  The death chant fell upon his tortured ears.  His staring
eyes wandered to the golden goblets from which the hideous votaries
would soon quench their inhuman thirst in his own, warm life-blood.

He wished that he might be granted the brief respite of unconsciousness
before the final plunge of the keen blade--and then there was a
frightful roar that sounded almost in his ears.  The High Priestess
lowered her dagger.  Her eyes went wide in horror.  The priestesses,
her votaresses, screamed and fled madly toward the exits.  The priests
roared out their rage and terror according to the temper of their
courage.  Werper strained his neck about to catch a sight of the cause
of their panic, and when, at last he saw it, he too went cold in dread,
for what his eyes beheld was the figure of a huge lion standing in the
center of the temple, and already a single victim lay mangled beneath
his cruel paws.

Again the lord of the wilderness roared, turning his baleful gaze upon
the altar.  La staggered forward, reeled, and fell across Werper in a
swoon.




6

The Arab Raid


After their first terror had subsided subsequent to the shock of the
earthquake, Basuli and his warriors hastened back into the passageway
in search of Tarzan and two of their own number who were also missing.

They found the way blocked by jammed and distorted rock.  For two days
they labored to tear a way through to their imprisoned friends; but
when, after Herculean efforts, they had unearthed but a few yards of
the choked passage, and discovered the mangled remains of one of their
fellows they were forced to the conclusion that Tarzan and the second
Waziri also lay dead beneath the rock mass farther in, beyond human
aid, and no longer susceptible of it.

Again and again as they labored they called aloud the names of their
master and their comrade; but no answering call rewarded their
listening ears.  At last they gave up the search.  Tearfully they cast
a last look at the shattered tomb of their master, shouldered the heavy
burden of gold that would at least furnish comfort, if not happiness,
to their bereaved and beloved mistress, and made their mournful way
back across the desolate valley of Opar, and downward through the
forests beyond toward the distant bungalow.

And as they marched what sorry fate was already drawing down upon that
peaceful, happy home!

From the north came Achmet Zek, riding to the summons of his
lieutenant's letter.  With him came his horde of renegade Arabs,
outlawed marauders, these, and equally degraded blacks, garnered from
the more debased and ignorant tribes of savage cannibals through whose
countries the raider passed to and fro with perfect impunity.

Mugambi, the ebon Hercules, who had shared the dangers and vicissitudes
of his beloved Bwana, from Jungle Island, almost to the headwaters of
the Ugambi, was the first to note the bold approach of the sinister
caravan.

He it was whom Tarzan had left in charge of the warriors who remained
to guard Lady Greystoke, nor could a braver or more loyal guardian have
been found in any clime or upon any soil.  A giant in stature, a
savage, fearless warrior, the huge black possessed also soul and
judgment in proportion to his bulk and his ferocity.

Not once since his master had departed had he been beyond sight or
sound of the bungalow, except when Lady Greystoke chose to canter
across the broad plain, or relieve the monotony of her loneliness by a
brief hunting excursion.  On such occasions Mugambi, mounted upon a
wiry Arab, had ridden close at her horse's heels.

The raiders were still a long way off when the warrior's keen eyes
discovered them.  For a time he stood scrutinizing the advancing party
in silence, then he turned and ran rapidly in the direction of the
native huts which lay a few hundred yards below the bungalow.

Here he called out to the lolling warriors.  He issued orders rapidly.
In compliance with them the men seized upon their weapons and their
shields.  Some ran to call in the workers from the fields and to warn
the tenders of the flocks and herds.  The majority followed Mugambi
back toward the bungalow.

The dust of the raiders was still a long distance away.  Mugambi could
not know positively that it hid an enemy; but he had spent a lifetime
of savage life in savage Africa, and he had seen parties before come
thus unheralded.  Sometimes they had come in peace and sometimes they
had come in war--one could never tell.  It was well to be prepared.
Mugambi did not like the haste with which the strangers advanced.

The Greystoke bungalow was not well adapted for defense.  No palisade
surrounded it, for, situated as it was, in the heart of loyal Waziri,
its master had anticipated no possibility of an attack in force by any
enemy.  Heavy, wooden shutters there were to close the window apertures
against hostile arrows, and these Mugambi was engaged in lowering when
Lady Greystoke appeared upon the veranda.

"Why, Mugambi!" she exclaimed.  "What has happened?  Why are you
lowering the shutters?"

Mugambi pointed out across the plain to where a white-robed force of
mounted men was now distinctly visible.

"Arabs," he explained.  "They come for no good purpose in the absence
of the Great Bwana."

Beyond the neat lawn and the flowering shrubs, Jane Clayton saw the
glistening bodies of her Waziri.  The sun glanced from the tips of
their metal-shod spears, picked out the gorgeous colors in the feathers
of their war bonnets, and reflected the high-lights from the glossy
skins of their broad shoulders and high cheek bones.

Jane Clayton surveyed them with unmixed feelings of pride and
affection.  What harm could befall her with such as these to protect
her?

The raiders had halted now, a hundred yards out upon the plain.
Mugambi had hastened down to join his warriors.  He advanced a few
yards before them and raising his voice hailed the strangers.  Achmet
Zek sat straight in his saddle before his henchmen.

"Arab!" cried Mugambi.  "What do you here?"

"We come in peace," Achmet Zek called back.

"Then turn and go in peace," replied Mugambi.  "We do not want you
here.  There can be no peace between Arab and Waziri."

Mugambi, although not born in Waziri, had been adopted into the tribe,
which now contained no member more jealous of its traditions and its
prowess than he.

Achmet Zek drew to one side of his horde, speaking to his men in a low
voice.  A moment later, without warning, a ragged volley was poured
into the ranks of the Waziri.  A couple of warriors fell, the others
were for charging the attackers; but Mugambi was a cautious as well as
a brave leader.  He knew the futility of charging mounted men armed
with muskets.  He withdrew his force behind the shrubbery of the
garden.  Some he dispatched to various other parts of the grounds
surrounding the bungalow.  Half a dozen he sent to the bungalow itself
with instructions to keep their mistress within doors, and to protect
her with their lives.

Adopting the tactics of the desert fighters from which he had sprung,
Achmet Zek led his followers at a gallop in a long, thin line,
describing a great circle which drew closer and closer in toward the
defenders.

At that part of the circle closest to the Waziri, a constant fusillade
of shots was poured into the bushes behind which the black warriors had
concealed themselves.  The latter, on their part, loosed their slim
shafts at the nearest of the enemy.

The Waziri, justly famed for their archery, found no cause to blush for
their performance that day.  Time and again some swarthy horseman threw
hands above his head and toppled from his saddle, pierced by a deadly
arrow; but the contest was uneven.  The Arabs outnumbered the Waziri;
their bullets penetrated the shrubbery and found marks that the Arab
riflemen had not even seen; and then Achmet Zek circled inward a half
mile above the bungalow, tore down a section of the fence, and led his
marauders within the grounds.

Across the fields they charged at a mad run.  Not again did they pause
to lower fences, instead, they drove their wild mounts straight for
them, clearing the obstacles as lightly as winged gulls.

Mugambi saw them coming, and, calling those of his warriors who
remained, ran for the bungalow and the last stand.  Upon the veranda
Lady Greystoke stood, rifle in hand.  More than a single raider had
accounted to her steady nerves and cool aim for his outlawry; more than
a single pony raced, riderless, in the wake of the charging horde.

Mugambi pushed his mistress back into the greater security of the
interior, and with his depleted force prepared to make a last stand
against the foe.

On came the Arabs, shouting and waving their long guns above their
heads.  Past the veranda they raced, pouring a deadly fire into the
kneeling Waziri who discharged their volley of arrows from behind their
long, oval shields--shields well adapted, perhaps, to stop a hostile
arrow, or deflect a spear; but futile, quite, before the leaden
missiles of the riflemen.

From beneath the half-raised shutters of the bungalow other bowmen did
effective service in greater security, and after the first assault,
Mugambi withdrew his entire force within the building.

Again and again the Arabs charged, at last forming a stationary circle
about the little fortress, and outside the effective range of the
defenders' arrows.  From their new position they fired at will at the
windows.  One by one the Waziri fell.  Fewer and fewer were the arrows
that replied to the guns of the raiders, and at last Achmet Zek felt
safe in ordering an assault.

Firing as they ran, the bloodthirsty horde raced for the veranda.  A
dozen of them fell to the arrows of the defenders; but the majority
reached the door.  Heavy gun butts fell upon it.  The crash of
splintered wood mingled with the report of a rifle as Jane Clayton
fired through the panels upon the relentless foe.

Upon both sides of the door men fell; but at last the frail barrier
gave to the vicious assaults of the maddened attackers; it crumpled
inward and a dozen swarthy murderers leaped into the living-room.  At
the far end stood Jane Clayton surrounded by the remnant of her devoted
guardians.  The floor was covered by the bodies of those who already
had given up their lives in her defense.  In the forefront of her
protectors stood the giant Mugambi.  The Arabs raised their rifles to
pour in the last volley that would effectually end all resistance; but
Achmet Zek roared out a warning order that stayed their trigger fingers.

"Fire not upon the woman!" he cried.  "Who harms her, dies.  Take the
woman alive!"

The Arabs rushed across the room; the Waziri met them with their heavy
spears.  Swords flashed, long-barreled pistols roared out their sullen
death dooms.  Mugambi launched his spear at the nearest of the enemy
with a force that drove the heavy shaft completely through the Arab's
body, then he seized a pistol from another, and grasping it by the
barrel brained all who forced their way too near his mistress.

Emulating his example the few warriors who remained to him fought like
demons; but one by one they fell, until only Mugambi remained to defend
the life and honor of the ape-man's mate.

From across the room Achmet Zek watched the unequal struggle and urged
on his minions.  In his hands was a jeweled musket.  Slowly he raised
it to his shoulder, waiting until another move should place Mugambi at
his mercy without endangering the lives of the woman or any of his own
followers.

At last the moment came, and Achmet Zek pulled the trigger.  Without a
sound the brave Mugambi sank to the floor at the feet of Jane Clayton.

An instant later she was surrounded and disarmed.  Without a word they
dragged her from the bungalow.  A giant Negro lifted her to the pommel
of his saddle, and while the raiders searched the bungalow and
outhouses for plunder he rode with her beyond the gates and waited the
coming of his master.

Jane Clayton saw the raiders lead the horses from the corral, and drive
the herds in from the fields.  She saw her home plundered of all that
represented intrinsic worth in the eyes of the Arabs, and then she saw
the torch applied, and the flames lick up what remained.

And at last, when the raiders assembled after glutting their fury and
their avarice, and rode away with her toward the north, she saw the
smoke and the flames rising far into the heavens until the winding of
the trail into the thick forests hid the sad view from her eyes.

As the flames ate their way into the living-room, reaching out forked
tongues to lick up the bodies of the dead, one of that gruesome company
whose bloody welterings had long since been stilled, moved again.  It
was a huge black who rolled over upon his side and opened blood-shot,
suffering eyes.  Mugambi, whom the Arabs had left for dead, still
lived.  The hot flames were almost upon him as he raised himself
painfully upon his hands and knees and crawled slowly toward the
doorway.

Again and again he sank weakly to the floor; but each time he rose
again and continued his pitiful way toward safety.  After what seemed
to him an interminable time, during which the flames had become a
veritable fiery furnace at the far side of the room, the great black
managed to reach the veranda, roll down the steps, and crawl off into
the cool safety of some nearby shrubbery.

All night he lay there, alternately unconscious and painfully sentient;
and in the latter state watching with savage hatred the lurid flames
which still rose from burning crib and hay cock.  A prowling lion
roared close at hand; but the giant black was unafraid.  There was
place for but a single thought in his savage mind--revenge!  revenge!
revenge!




7

The Jewel-Room of Opar


For some time Tarzan lay where he had fallen upon the floor of the
treasure chamber beneath the ruined walls of Opar.  He lay as one dead;
but he was not dead.  At length he stirred.  His eyes opened upon the
utter darkness of the room.  He raised his hand to his head and brought
it away sticky with clotted blood.  He sniffed at his fingers, as a
wild beast might sniff at the life-blood upon a wounded paw.

Slowly he rose to a sitting posture--listening.  No sound reached to
the buried depths of his sepulcher.  He staggered to his feet, and
groped his way about among the tiers of ingots.  What was he?  Where
was he?  His head ached; but otherwise he felt no ill effects from the
blow that had felled him.  The accident he did not recall, nor did he
recall aught of what had led up to it.

He let his hands grope unfamiliarly over his limbs, his torso, and his
head.  He felt of the quiver at his back, the knife in his loin cloth.
Something struggled for recognition within his brain.  Ah!  he had it.
There was something missing.  He crawled about upon the floor, feeling
with his hands for the thing that instinct warned him was gone.  At
last he found it--the heavy war spear that in past years had formed so
important a feature of his daily life, almost of his very existence, so
inseparably had it been connected with his every action since the
long-gone day that he had wrested his first spear from the body of a
black victim of his savage training.

Tarzan was sure that there was another and more lovely world than that
which was confined to the darkness of the four stone walls surrounding
him.  He continued his search and at last found the doorway leading
inward beneath the city and the temple.  This he followed, most
incautiously.  He came to the stone steps leading upward to the higher
level.  He ascended them and continued onward toward the well.

Nothing spurred his hurt memory to a recollection of past familiarity
with his surroundings.  He blundered on through the darkness as though
he were traversing an open plain under the brilliance of a noonday sun,
and suddenly there happened that which had to happen under the
circumstances of his rash advance.

He reached the brink of the well, stepped outward into space, lunged
forward, and shot downward into the inky depths below.  Still clutching
his spear, he struck the water, and sank beneath its surface, plumbing
the depths.

The fall had not injured him, and when he rose to the surface, he shook
the water from his eyes, and found that he could see.  Daylight was
filtering into the well from the orifice far above his head.  It
illumined the inner walls faintly.  Tarzan gazed about him.  On the
level with the surface of the water he saw a large opening in the dark
and slimy wall.  He swam to it, and drew himself out upon the wet floor
of a tunnel.

Along this he passed; but now he went warily, for Tarzan of the Apes
was learning.  The unexpected pit had taught him care in the traversing
of dark passageways--he needed no second lesson.

For a long distance the passage went straight as an arrow.  The floor
was slippery, as though at times the rising waters of the well
overflowed and flooded it.  This, in itself, retarded Tarzan's pace,
for it was with difficulty that he kept his footing.

The foot of a stairway ended the passage.  Up this he made his way.  It
turned back and forth many times, leading, at last, into a small,
circular chamber, the gloom of which was relieved by a faint light
which found ingress through a tubular shaft several feet in diameter
which rose from the center of the room's ceiling, upward to a distance
of a hundred feet or more, where it terminated in a stone grating
through which Tarzan could see a blue and sun-lit sky.

Curiosity prompted the ape-man to investigate his surroundings.
Several metal-bound, copper-studded chests constituted the sole
furniture of the round room.  Tarzan let his hands run over these.  He
felt of the copper studs, he pulled upon the hinges, and at last, by
chance, he raised the cover of one.

An exclamation of delight broke from his lips at sight of the pretty
contents.  Gleaming and glistening in the subdued light of the chamber,
lay a great tray full of brilliant stones.  Tarzan, reverted to the
primitive by his accident, had no conception of the fabulous value of
his find.  To him they were but pretty pebbles.  He plunged his hands
into them and let the priceless gems filter through his fingers.  He
went to others of the chests, only to find still further stores of
precious stones.  Nearly all were cut, and from these he gathered a
handful and filled the pouch which dangled at his side--the uncut
stones he tossed back into the chests.

Unwittingly, the ape-man had stumbled upon the forgotten jewel-room of
Opar.  For ages it had lain buried beneath the temple of the Flaming
God, midway of one of the many inky passages which the superstitious
descendants of the ancient Sun Worshipers had either dared not or cared
not to explore.

Tiring at last of this diversion, Tarzan took up his way along the
corridor which led upward from the jewel-room by a steep incline.
Winding and twisting, but always tending upward, the tunnel led him
nearer and nearer to the surface, ending finally in a low-ceiled room,
lighter than any that he had as yet discovered.

Above him an opening in the ceiling at the upper end of a flight of
concrete steps revealed a brilliant sunlit scene.  Tarzan viewed the
vine-covered columns in mild wonderment.  He puckered his brows in an
attempt to recall some recollection of similar things.  He was not sure
of himself.  There was a tantalizing suggestion always present in his
mind that something was eluding him--that he should know many things
which he did not know.

His earnest cogitation was rudely interrupted by a thunderous roar from
the opening above him.  Following the roar came the cries and screams
of men and women.  Tarzan grasped his spear more firmly and ascended
the steps.  A strange sight met his eyes as he emerged from the
semi-darkness of the cellar to the brilliant light of the temple.

The creatures he saw before him he recognized for what they were--men
and women, and a huge lion.  The men and women were scuttling for the
safety of the exits.  The lion stood upon the body of one who had been
less fortunate than the others.  He was in the center of the temple.
Directly before Tarzan, a woman stood beside a block of stone.  Upon
the top of the stone lay stretched a man, and as the ape-man watched
the scene, he saw the lion glare terribly at the two who remained
within the temple.  Another thunderous roar broke from the savage
throat, the woman screamed and swooned across the body of the man
stretched prostrate upon the stone altar before her.

The lion advanced a few steps and crouched.  The tip of his sinuous
tail twitched nervously.  He was upon the point of charging when his
eyes were attracted toward the ape-man.

Werper, helpless upon the altar, saw the great carnivore preparing to
leap upon him.  He saw the sudden change in the beast's expression as
his eyes wandered to something beyond the altar and out of the
Belgian's view.  He saw the formidable creature rise to a standing
position.  A figure darted past Werper.  He saw a mighty arm upraised,
and a stout spear shoot forward toward the lion, to bury itself in the
broad chest.

He saw the lion snapping and tearing at the weapon's shaft, and he saw,
wonder of wonders, the naked giant who had hurled the missile charging
upon the great beast, only a long knife ready to meet those ferocious
fangs and talons.

The lion reared up to meet this new enemy.  The beast was growling
frightfully, and then upon the startled ears of the Belgian, broke a
similar savage growl from the lips of the man rushing upon the beast.

By a quick side step, Tarzan eluded the first swinging clutch of the
lion's paws.  Darting to the beast's side, he leaped upon the tawny
back.  His arms encircled the maned neck, his teeth sank deep into the
brute's flesh.  Roaring, leaping, rolling and struggling, the giant cat
attempted to dislodge this savage enemy, and all the while one great,
brown fist was driving a long keen blade repeatedly into the beast's
side.

During the battle, La regained consciousness.  Spellbound, she stood
above her victim watching the spectacle. It seemed incredible that a
human being could best the king of beasts in personal encounter and yet
before her very eyes there was taking place just such an improbability.

At last Tarzan's knife found the great heart, and with a final,
spasmodic struggle the lion rolled over upon the marble floor, dead.
Leaping to his feet the conqueror placed a foot upon the carcass of his
kill, raised his face toward the heavens, and gave voice to so hideous
a cry that both La and Werper trembled as it reverberated through the
temple.

Then the ape-man turned, and Werper recognized him as the man he had
left for dead in the treasure room.




8

The Escape from Opar


Werper was astounded.  Could this creature be the same dignified
Englishman who had entertained him so graciously in his luxurious
African home?  Could this wild beast, with blazing eyes, and bloody
countenance, be at the same time a man?  Could the horrid, victory cry
he had but just heard have been formed in human throat?

Tarzan was eyeing the man and the woman, a puzzled expression in his
eyes, but there was no faintest tinge of recognition.  It was as though
he had discovered some new species of living creature and was marveling
at his find.

La was studying the ape-man's features.  Slowly her large eyes opened
very wide.

"Tarzan!" she exclaimed, and then, in the vernacular of the great apes
which constant association with the anthropoids had rendered the common
language of the Oparians: "You have come back to me!  La has ignored
the mandates of her religion, waiting, always waiting for Tarzan--for
her Tarzan.  She has taken no mate, for in all the world there was but
one with whom La would mate.  And now you have come back!  Tell me, O
Tarzan, that it is for me you have returned."

Werper listened to the unintelligible jargon.  He looked from La to
Tarzan.  Would the latter understand this strange tongue?  To the
Belgian's surprise, the Englishman answered in a language evidently
identical to hers.

"Tarzan," he repeated, musingly.  "Tarzan.  The name sounds familiar."

"It is your name--you are Tarzan," cried La.

"I am Tarzan?" The ape-man shrugged.  "Well, it is a good name--I know
no other, so I will keep it; but I do not know you.  I did not come
hither for you.  Why I came, I do not know at all; neither do I know
from whence I came.  Can you tell me?"

La shook her head.  "I never knew," she replied.

Tarzan turned toward Werper and put the same question to him; but in
the language of the great apes.  The Belgian shook his head.

"I do not understand that language," he said in French.

Without effort, and apparently without realizing that he made the
change, Tarzan repeated his question in French.  Werper suddenly came
to a full realization of the magnitude of the injury of which Tarzan
was a victim.  The man had lost his memory--no longer could he
recollect past events.  The Belgian was upon the point of enlightening
him, when it suddenly occurred to him that by keeping Tarzan in
ignorance, for a time at least, of his true identity, it might be
possible to turn the ape-man's misfortune to his own advantage.

"I cannot tell you from whence you came," he said; "but this I can tell
you--if we do not get out of this horrible place we shall both be slain
upon this bloody altar.  The woman was about to plunge her knife into
my heart when the lion interrupted the fiendish ritual.  Come!  Before
they recover from their fright and reassemble, let us find a way out of
their damnable temple."

Tarzan turned again toward La.

"Why," he asked, "would you have killed this man?  Are you hungry?"

The High Priestess cried out in disgust.

"Did he attempt to kill you?" continued Tarzan.

The woman shook her head.

"Then why should you have wished to kill him?" Tarzan was determined to
get to the bottom of the thing.

La raised her slender arm and pointed toward the sun.

"We were offering up his soul as a gift to the Flaming God," she said.

Tarzan looked puzzled.  He was again an ape, and apes do not understand
such matters as souls and Flaming Gods.

"Do you wish to die?" he asked Werper.

The Belgian assured him, with tears in his eyes, that he did not wish
to die.

"Very well then, you shall not," said Tarzan.  "Come!  We will go.
This SHE would kill you and keep me for herself.  It is no place anyway
for a Mangani.  I should soon die, shut up behind these stone walls."

He turned toward La.  "We are going now," he said.

The woman rushed forward and seized the ape-man's hands in hers.

"Do not leave me!" she cried.  "Stay, and you shall be High Priest.  La
loves you.  All Opar shall be yours.  Slaves shall wait upon you.
Stay, Tarzan of the Apes, and let love reward you."

The ape-man pushed the kneeling woman aside.  "Tarzan does not desire
you," he said, simply, and stepping to Werper's side he cut the
Belgian's bonds and motioned him to follow.

Panting--her face convulsed with rage, La sprang to her feet.

"Stay, you shall!" she screamed.  "La will have you--if she cannot have
you alive, she will have you dead," and raising her face to the sun she
gave voice to the same hideous shriek that Werper had heard once before
and Tarzan many times.

In answer to her cry a babel of voices broke from the surrounding
chambers and corridors.

"Come, Guardian Priests!" she cried.  "The infidels have profaned the
holiest of the holies.  Come!  Strike terror to their hearts; defend La
and her altar; wash clean the temple with the blood of the polluters."

Tarzan understood, though Werper did not.  The former glanced at the
Belgian and saw that he was unarmed.  Stepping quickly to La's side the
ape-man seized her in his strong arms and though she fought with all
the mad savagery of a demon, he soon disarmed her, handing her long,
sacrificial knife to Werper.

"You will need this," he said, and then from each doorway a horde of
the monstrous, little men of Opar streamed into the temple.

They were armed with bludgeons and knives, and fortified in their
courage by fanatical hate and frenzy.  Werper was terrified.  Tarzan
stood eyeing the foe in proud disdain. Slowly he advanced toward the
exit he had chosen to utilize in making his way from the temple.  A
burly priest barred his way.  Behind the first was a score of others.
Tarzan swung his heavy spear, clublike, down upon the skull of the
priest.  The fellow collapsed, his head crushed.

Again and again the weapon fell as Tarzan made his way slowly toward
the doorway.  Werper pressed close behind, casting backward glances
toward the shrieking, dancing mob menacing their rear.  He held the
sacrificial knife ready to strike whoever might come within its reach;
but none came.  For a time he wondered that they should so bravely
battle with the giant ape-man, yet hesitate to rush upon him, who was
relatively so weak.  Had they done so he knew that he must have fallen
at the first charge.  Tarzan had reached the doorway over the corpses
of all that had stood to dispute his way, before Werper guessed at the
reason for his immunity.  The priests feared the sacrificial knife!
Willingly would they face death and welcome it if it came while they
defended their High Priestess and her altar; but evidently there were
deaths, and deaths.  Some strange superstition must surround that
polished blade, that no Oparian cared to chance a death thrust from it,
yet gladly rushed to the slaughter of the ape-man's flaying spear.

Once outside the temple court, Werper communicated his discovery to
Tarzan.  The ape-man grinned, and let Werper go before him, brandishing
the jeweled and holy weapon.  Like leaves before a gale, the Oparians
scattered in all directions and Tarzan and the Belgian found a clear
passage through the corridors and chambers of the ancient temple.

The Belgian's eyes went wide as they passed through the room of the
seven pillars of solid gold.  With ill-concealed avarice he looked upon
the age-old, golden tablets set in the walls of nearly every room and
down the sides of many of the corridors.  To the ape-man all this
wealth appeared to mean nothing.

On the two went, chance leading them toward the broad avenue which lay
between the stately piles of the half-ruined edifices and the inner
wall of the city.  Great apes jabbered at them and menaced them; but
Tarzan answered them after their own kind, giving back taunt for taunt,
insult for insult, challenge for challenge.

Werper saw a hairy bull swing down from a broken column and advance,
stiff-legged and bristling, toward the naked giant.  The yellow fangs
were bared, angry snarls and barkings rumbled threateningly through the
thick and hanging lips.

The Belgian watched his companion.  To his horror, he saw the man stoop
until his closed knuckles rested upon the ground as did those of the
anthropoid.  He saw him circle, stiff-legged about the circling ape.
He heard the same bestial barkings and growlings issue from the human
throat that were coming from the mouth of the brute.  Had his eyes been
closed he could not have known but that two giant apes were bridling
for combat.

But there was no battle.  It ended as the majority of such jungle
encounters end--one of the boasters loses his nerve, and becomes
suddenly interested in a blowing leaf, a beetle, or the lice upon his
hairy stomach.

In this instance it was the anthropoid that retired in stiff dignity to
inspect an unhappy caterpillar, which he presently devoured.  For a
moment Tarzan seemed inclined to pursue the argument.  He swaggered
truculently, stuck out his chest, roared and advanced closer to the
bull.  It was with difficulty that Werper finally persuaded him to
leave well enough alone and continue his way from the ancient city of
the Sun Worshipers.

The two searched for nearly an hour before they found the narrow exit
through the inner wall.  From there the well-worn trail led them beyond
the outer fortification to the desolate valley of Opar.

Tarzan had no idea, in so far as Werper could discover, as to where he
was or whence he came.  He wandered aimlessly about, searching for
food, which he discovered beneath small rocks, or hiding in the shade
of the scant brush which dotted the ground.

The Belgian was horrified by the hideous menu of his companion.
Beetles, rodents and caterpillars were devoured with seeming relish.
Tarzan was indeed an ape again.

At last Werper succeeded in leading his companion toward the distant
hills which mark the northwestern boundary of the valley, and together
the two set out in the direction of the Greystoke bungalow.

What purpose prompted the Belgian in leading the victim of his
treachery and greed back toward his former home it is difficult to
guess, unless it was that without Tarzan there could be no ransom for
Tarzan's wife.

That night they camped in the valley beyond the hills, and as they sat
before a little fire where cooked a wild pig that had fallen to one of
Tarzan's arrows, the latter sat lost in speculation.  He seemed
continually to be trying to grasp some mental image which as constantly
eluded him.

At last he opened the leathern pouch which hung at his side.  From it
he poured into the palm of his hand a quantity of glittering gems.  The
firelight playing upon them conjured a multitude of scintillating rays,
and as the wide eyes of the Belgian looked on in rapt fascination, the
man's expression at last acknowledged a tangible purpose in courting
the society of the ape-man.




9

The Theft of the Jewels


For two days Werper sought for the party that had accompanied him from
the camp to the barrier cliffs; but not until late in the afternoon of
the second day did he find clew to its whereabouts, and then in such
gruesome form that he was totally unnerved by the sight.

In an open glade he came upon the bodies of three of the blacks,
terribly mutilated, nor did it require considerable deductive power to
explain their murder.  Of the little party only these three had not
been slaves.  The others, evidently tempted to hope for freedom from
their cruel Arab master, had taken advantage of their separation from
the main camp, to slay the three representatives of the hated power
which held them in slavery, and vanish into the jungle.

Cold sweat exuded from Werper's forehead as he contemplated the fate
which chance had permitted him to escape, for had he been present when
the conspiracy bore fruit, he, too, must have been of the garnered.

Tarzan showed not the slightest surprise or interest in the discovery.
Inherent in him was a calloused familiarity with violent death.  The
refinements of his recent civilization expunged by the force of the sad
calamity which had befallen him, left only the primitive sensibilities
which his childhood's training had imprinted indelibly upon the fabric
of his mind.

The training of Kala, the examples and precepts of Kerchak, of Tublat,
and of Terkoz now formed the basis of his every thought and action.  He
retained a mechanical knowledge of French and English speech.  Werper
had spoken to him in French, and Tarzan had replied in the same tongue
without conscious realization that he had departed from the
anthropoidal speech in which he had addressed La.  Had Werper used
English, the result would have been the same.

Again, that night, as the two sat before their camp fire, Tarzan played
with his shining baubles.  Werper asked him what they were and where he
had found them.  The ape-man replied that they were gay-colored stones,
with which he purposed fashioning a necklace, and that he had found
them far beneath the sacrificial court of the temple of the Flaming God.

Werper was relieved to find that Tarzan had no conception of the value
of the gems.  This would make it easier for the Belgian to obtain
possession of them.  Possibly the man would give them to him for the
asking.  Werper reached out his hand toward the little pile that Tarzan
had arranged upon a piece of flat wood before him.

"Let me see them," said the Belgian.

Tarzan placed a large palm over his treasure.  He bared his fighting
fangs, and growled.  Werper withdrew his hand more quickly than he had
advanced it.  Tarzan resumed his playing with the gems, and his
conversation with Werper as though nothing unusual had occurred.  He
had but exhibited the beast's jealous protective instinct for a
possession.  When he killed he shared the meat with Werper; but had
Werper ever, by accident, laid a hand upon Tarzan's share, he would
have aroused the same savage, and resentful warning.

From that occurrence dated the beginning of a great fear in the breast
of the Belgian for his savage companion.  He had never understood the
transformation that had been wrought in Tarzan by the blow upon his
head, other than to attribute it to a form of amnesia.  That Tarzan had
once been, in truth, a savage, jungle beast, Werper had not known, and
so, of course, he could not guess that the man had reverted to the
state in which his childhood and young manhood had been spent.

Now Werper saw in the Englishman a dangerous maniac, whom the slightest
untoward accident might turn upon him with rending fangs.  Not for a
moment did Werper attempt to delude himself into the belief that he
could defend himself successfully against an attack by the ape-man.
His one hope lay in eluding him, and making for the far distant camp of
Achmet Zek as rapidly as he could; but armed only with the sacrificial
knife, Werper shrank from attempting the journey through the jungle.
Tarzan constituted a protection that was by no means despicable, even
in the face of the larger carnivora, as Werper had reason to
acknowledge from the evidence he had witnessed in the Oparian temple.

Too, Werper had his covetous soul set upon the pouch of gems, and so he
was torn between the various emotions of avarice and fear.  But avarice
it was that burned most strongly in his breast, to the end that he
dared the dangers and suffered the terrors of constant association with
him he thought a mad man, rather than give up the hope of obtaining
possession of the fortune which the contents of the little pouch
represented.

Achmet Zek should know nothing of these--these would be for Werper
alone, and so soon as he could encompass his design he would reach the
coast and take passage for America, where he could conceal himself
beneath the veil of a new identity and enjoy to some measure the fruits
of his theft.  He had it all planned out, did Lieutenant Albert Werper,
living in anticipation the luxurious life of the idle rich.  He even
found himself regretting that America was so provincial, and that
nowhere in the new world was a city that might compare with his beloved
Brussels.

It was upon the third day of their progress from Opar that the keen
ears of Tarzan caught the sound of men behind them.  Werper heard
nothing above the humming of the jungle insects, and the chattering
life of the lesser monkeys and the birds.

For a time Tarzan stood in statuesque silence, listening, his sensitive
nostrils dilating as he assayed each passing breeze.  Then he withdrew
Werper into the concealment of thick brush, and waited.  Presently,
along the game trail that Werper and Tarzan had been following, there
came in sight a sleek, black warrior, alert and watchful.

In single file behind him, there followed, one after another, near
fifty others, each burdened with two dull-yellow ingots lashed upon his
back.  Werper recognized the party immediately as that which had
accompanied Tarzan on his journey to Opar.  He glanced at the ape-man;
but in the savage, watchful eyes he saw no recognition of Basuli and
those other loyal Waziri.

When all had passed, Tarzan rose and emerged from concealment.  He
looked down the trail in the direction the party had gone.  Then he
turned to Werper.

"We will follow and slay them," he said.

"Why?" asked the Belgian.

"They are black," explained Tarzan.  "It was a black who killed Kala.
They are the enemies of the Manganis."

Werper did not relish the idea of engaging in a battle with Basuli and
his fierce fighting men.  And, again, he had welcomed the sight of them
returning toward the Greystoke bungalow, for he had begun to have
doubts as to his ability to retrace his steps to the Waziri country.
Tarzan, he knew, had not the remotest idea of whither they were going.
By keeping at a safe distance behind the laden warriors, they would
have no difficulty in following them home.  Once at the bungalow,
Werper knew the way to the camp of Achmet Zek.  There was still another
reason why he did not wish to interfere with the Waziri--they were
bearing the great burden of treasure in the direction he wished it
borne.  The farther they took it, the less the distance that he and
Achmet Zek would have to transport it.

He argued with the ape-man therefore, against the latter's desire to
exterminate the blacks, and at last he prevailed upon Tarzan to follow
them in peace, saying that he was sure they would lead them out of the
forest into a rich country, teeming with game.

It was many marches from Opar to the Waziri country; but at last came
the hour when Tarzan and the Belgian, following the trail of the
warriors, topped the last rise, and saw before them the broad Waziri
plain, the winding river, and the distant forests to the north and west.

A mile or more ahead of them, the line of warriors was creeping like a
giant caterpillar through the tall grasses of the plain.  Beyond,
grazing herds of zebra, hartebeest, and topi dotted the level
landscape, while closer to the river a bull buffalo, his head and
shoulders protruding from the reeds watched the advancing blacks for a
moment, only to turn at last and disappear into the safety of his dank
and gloomy retreat.

Tarzan looked out across the familiar vista with no faintest gleam of
recognition in his eyes.  He saw the game animals, and his mouth
watered; but he did not look in the direction of his bungalow.  Werper,
however, did.  A puzzled expression entered the Belgian's eyes.  He
shaded them with his palms and gazed long and earnestly toward the spot
where the bungalow had stood.  He could not credit the testimony of his
eyes--there was no bungalow--no barns--no out-houses.  The corrals, the
hay stacks--all were gone.  What could it mean?

And then, slowly there filtered into Werper's consciousness an
explanation of the havoc that had been wrought in that peaceful valley
since last his eyes had rested upon it--Achmet Zek had been there!

Basuli and his warriors had noted the devastation the moment they had
come in sight of the farm.  Now they hastened on toward it talking
excitedly among themselves in animated speculation upon the cause and
meaning of the catastrophe.

When, at last they crossed the trampled garden and stood before the
charred ruins of their master's bungalow, their greatest fears became
convictions in the light of the evidence about them.

Remnants of human dead, half devoured by prowling hyenas and others of
the carnivora which infested the region, lay rotting upon the ground,
and among the corpses remained sufficient remnants of their clothing
and ornaments to make clear to Basuli the frightful story of the
disaster that had befallen his master's house.

"The Arabs," he said, as his men clustered about him.

The Waziri gazed about in mute rage for several minutes.  Everywhere
they encountered only further evidence of the ruthlessness of the cruel
enemy that had come during the Great Bwana's absence and laid waste his
property.

"What did they with 'Lady'?" asked one of the blacks.

They had always called Lady Greystoke thus.

"The women they would have taken with them," said Basuli.  "Our women
and his."

A giant black raised his spear above his head, and gave voice to a
savage cry of rage and hate.  The others followed his example.  Basuli
silenced them with a gesture.

"This is no time for useless noises of the mouth," he said.  "The Great
Bwana has taught us that it is acts by which things are done, not
words.  Let us save our breath--we shall need it all to follow up the
Arabs and slay them.  If 'Lady' and our women live the greater the need
of haste, and warriors cannot travel fast upon empty lungs."

From the shelter of the reeds along the river, Werper and Tarzan
watched the blacks.  They saw them dig a trench with their knives and
fingers.  They saw them lay their yellow burdens in it and scoop the
overturned earth back over the tops of the ingots.

Tarzan seemed little interested, after Werper had assured him that that
which they buried was not good to eat; but Werper was intensely
interested.  He would have given much had he had his own followers with
him, that he might take away the treasure as soon as the blacks left,
for he was sure that they would leave this scene of desolation and
death as soon as possible.

The treasure buried, the blacks removed themselves a short distance up
wind from the fetid corpses, where they made camp, that they might rest
before setting out in pursuit of the Arabs.  It was already dusk.
Werper and Tarzan sat devouring some pieces of meat they had brought
from their last camp.  The Belgian was occupied with his plans for the
immediate future.  He was positive that the Waziri would pursue Achmet
Zek, for he knew enough of savage warfare, and of the characteristics
of the Arabs and their degraded followers to guess that they had
carried the Waziri women off into slavery.  This alone would assure
immediate pursuit by so warlike a people as the Waziri.

Werper felt that he should find the means and the opportunity to push
on ahead, that he might warn Achmet Zek of the coming of Basuli, and
also of the location of the buried treasure.  What the Arab would now
do with Lady Greystoke, in view of the mental affliction of her
husband, Werper neither knew nor cared.  It was enough that the golden
treasure buried upon the site of the burned bungalow was infinitely
more valuable than any ransom that would have occurred even to the
avaricious mind of the Arab, and if Werper could persuade the raider to
share even a portion of it with him he would be well satisfied.

But by far the most important consideration, to Werper, at least, was
the incalculably valuable treasure in the little leathern pouch at
Tarzan's side.  If he could but obtain possession of this!  He must!
He would!

His eyes wandered to the object of his greed.  They measured Tarzan's
giant frame, and rested upon the rounded muscles of his arms.  It was
hopeless.  What could he, Werper, hope to accomplish, other than his
own death, by an attempt to wrest the gems from their savage owner?

Disconsolate, Werper threw himself upon his side.  His head was
pillowed on one arm, the other rested across his face in such a way
that his eyes were hidden from the ape-man, though one of them was
fastened upon him from beneath the shadow of the Belgian's forearm.
For a time he lay thus, glowering at Tarzan, and originating schemes
for plundering him of his treasure--schemes that were discarded as
futile as rapidly as they were born.

Tarzan presently let his own eyes rest upon Werper.  The Belgian saw
that he was being watched, and lay very still.  After a few moments he
simulated the regular breathing of deep slumber.

Tarzan had been thinking.  He had seen the Waziri bury their
belongings.  Werper had told him that they were hiding them lest some
one find them and take them away.  This seemed to Tarzan a splendid
plan for safeguarding valuables.  Since Werper had evinced a desire to
possess his glittering pebbles, Tarzan, with the suspicions of a
savage, had guarded the baubles, of whose worth he was entirely
ignorant, as zealously as though they spelled life or death to him.

For a long time the ape-man sat watching his companion.  At last,
convinced that he slept, Tarzan withdrew his hunting knife and
commenced to dig a hole in the ground before him.  With the blade he
loosened up the earth, and with his hands he scooped it out until he
had excavated a little cavity a few inches in diameter, and five or six
inches in depth.  Into this he placed the pouch of jewels.  Werper
almost forgot to breathe after the fashion of a sleeper as he saw what
the ape-man was doing--he scarce repressed an ejaculation of
satisfaction.

Tarzan become suddenly rigid as his keen ears noted the cessation of
the regular inspirations and expirations of his companion.  His
narrowed eyes bored straight down upon the Belgian.  Werper felt that
he was lost--he must risk all on his ability to carry on the deception.
He sighed, threw both arms outward, and turned over on his back
mumbling as though in the throes of a bad dream.  A moment later he
resumed the regular breathing.

Now he could not watch Tarzan, but he was sure that the man sat for a
long time looking at him.  Then, faintly, Werper heard the other's
hands scraping dirt, and later patting it down.  He knew then that the
jewels were buried.

It was an hour before Werper moved again, then he rolled over facing
Tarzan and opened his eyes.  The ape-man slept.  By reaching out his
hand Werper could touch the spot where the pouch was buried.

For a long time he lay watching and listening.  He moved about, making
more noise than necessary, yet Tarzan did not awaken.  He drew the
sacrificial knife from his belt, and plunged it into the ground.
Tarzan did not move.  Cautiously the Belgian pushed the blade downward
through the loose earth above the pouch.  He felt the point touch the
soft, tough fabric of the leather.  Then he pried down upon the handle.
Slowly the little mound of loose earth rose and parted.  An instant
later a corner of the pouch came into view.  Werper pulled it from its
hiding place, and tucked it in his shirt.  Then he refilled the hole
and pressed the dirt carefully down as it had been before.

Greed had prompted him to an act, the discovery of which by his
companion could lead only to the most frightful consequences for
Werper.  Already he could almost feel those strong, white fangs burying
themselves in his neck.  He shuddered.  Far out across the plain a
leopard screamed, and in the dense reeds behind him some great beast
moved on padded feet.

Werper feared these prowlers of the night; but infinitely more he
feared the just wrath of the human beast sleeping at his side.  With
utmost caution the Belgian arose.  Tarzan did not move.  Werper took a
few steps toward the plain and the distant forest to the northwest,
then he paused and fingered the hilt of the long knife in his belt.  He
turned and looked down upon the sleeper.

"Why not?" he mused.  "Then I should be safe."

He returned and bent above the ape-man.  Clutched tightly in his hand
was the sacrificial knife of the High Priestess of the Flaming God!




10

Achmet Zek Sees the Jewels


Mugambi, weak and suffering, had dragged his painful way along the
trail of the retreating raiders.  He could move but slowly, resting
often; but savage hatred and an equally savage desire for vengeance
kept him to his task.  As the days passed his wounds healed and his
strength returned, until at last his giant frame had regained all of
its former mighty powers.  Now he went more rapidly; but the mounted
Arabs had covered a great distance while the wounded black had been
painfully crawling after them.

They had reached their fortified camp, and there Achmet Zek awaited the
return of his lieutenant, Albert Werper.  During the long, rough
journey, Jane Clayton had suffered more in anticipation of her
impending fate than from the hardships of the road.

Achmet Zek had not deigned to acquaint her with his intentions
regarding her future.  She prayed that she had been captured in the
hope of ransom, for if such should prove the case, no great harm would
befall her at the hands of the Arabs; but there was the chance, the
horrid chance, that another fate awaited her.  She had heard of many
women, among whom were white women, who had been sold by outlaws such
as Achmet Zek into the slavery of black harems, or taken farther north
into the almost equally hideous existence of some Turkish seraglio.

Jane Clayton was of sterner stuff than that which bends in spineless
terror before danger.  Until hope proved futile she would not give it
up; nor did she entertain thoughts of self-destruction only as a final
escape from dishonor.  So long as Tarzan lived there was every reason
to expect succor.  No man nor beast who roamed the savage continent
could boast the cunning and the powers of her lord and master.  To her,
he was little short of omnipotent in his native world--this world of
savage beasts and savage men.  Tarzan would come, and she would be
rescued and avenged, of that she was certain.  She counted the days
that must elapse before he would return from Opar and discover what had
transpired during his absence.  After that it would be but a short time
before he had surrounded the Arab stronghold and punished the motley
crew of wrongdoers who inhabited it.

That he could find her she had no slightest doubt.  No spoor, however
faint, could elude the keen vigilance of his senses.  To him, the trail
of the raiders would be as plain as the printed page of an open book to
her.

And while she hoped, there came through the dark jungle another.
Terrified by night and by day, came Albert Werper.  A dozen times he
had escaped the claws and fangs of the giant carnivora only by what
seemed a miracle to him.  Armed with nothing more than the knife he had
brought with him from Opar, he had made his way through as savage a
country as yet exists upon the face of the globe.

By night he had slept in trees.  By day he had stumbled fearfully on,
often taking refuge among the branches when sight or sound of some
great cat warned him from danger.  But at last he had come within sight
of the palisade behind which were his fierce companions.

At almost the same time Mugambi came out of the jungle before the
walled village.  As he stood in the shadow of a great tree,
reconnoitering, he saw a man, ragged and disheveled, emerge from the
jungle almost at his elbow.  Instantly he recognized the newcomer as he
who had been a guest of his master before the latter had departed for
Opar.

The black was upon the point of hailing the Belgian when something
stayed him.  He saw the white man walking confidently across the
clearing toward the village gate.  No sane man thus approached a
village in this part of Africa unless he was sure of a friendly
welcome.  Mugambi waited.  His suspicions were aroused.

He heard Werper halloo; he saw the gates swing open, and he witnessed
the surprised and friendly welcome that was accorded the erstwhile
guest of Lord and Lady Greystoke.  A light broke upon the understanding
of Mugambi.  This white man had been a traitor and a spy.  It was to
him they owed the raid during the absence of the Great Bwana.  To his
hate for the Arabs, Mugambi added a still greater hate for the white
spy.

Within the village Werper passed hurriedly toward the silken tent of
Achmet Zek.  The Arab arose as his lieutenant entered.  His face showed
surprise as he viewed the tattered apparel of the Belgian.

"What has happened?" he asked.

Werper narrated all, save the little matter of the pouch of gems which
were now tightly strapped about his waist, beneath his clothing.  The
Arab's eyes narrowed greedily as his henchman described the treasure
that the Waziri had buried beside the ruins of the Greystoke bungalow.

"It will be a simple matter now to return and get it," said Achmet Zek.
"First we will await the coming of the rash Waziri, and after we have
slain them we may take our time to the treasure--none will disturb it
where it lies, for we shall leave none alive who knows of its existence.

"And the woman?" asked Werper.

"I shall sell her in the north," replied the raider.  "It is the only
way, now.  She should bring a good price."

The Belgian nodded.  He was thinking rapidly.  If he could persuade
Achmet Zek to send him in command of the party which took Lady
Greystoke north it would give him the opportunity he craved to make his
escape from his chief.  He would forego a share of the gold, if he
could but get away unscathed with the jewels.

He knew Achmet Zek well enough by this time to know that no member of
his band ever was voluntarily released from the service of Achmet Zek.
Most of the few who deserted were recaptured.  More than once had
Werper listened to their agonized screams as they were tortured before
being put to death.  The Belgian had no wish to take the slightest
chance of recapture.

"Who will go north with the woman," he asked, "while we are returning
for the gold that the Waziri buried by the bungalow of the Englishman?"

Achmet Zek thought for a moment.  The buried gold was of much greater
value than the price the woman would bring.  It was necessary to rid
himself of her as quickly as possible and it was also well to obtain
the gold with the least possible delay.  Of all his followers, the
Belgian was the most logical lieutenant to intrust with the command of
one of the parties.  An Arab, as familiar with the trails and tribes as
Achmet Zek himself, might collect the woman's price and make good his
escape into the far north.  Werper, on the other hand, could scarce
make his escape alone through a country hostile to Europeans while the
men he would send with the Belgian could be carefully selected with a
view to preventing Werper from persuading any considerable portion of
his command to accompany him should he contemplate desertion of his
chief.

At last the Arab spoke: "It is not necessary that we both return for
the gold.  You shall go north with the woman, carrying a letter to a
friend of mine who is always in touch with the best markets for such
merchandise, while I return for the gold.  We can meet again here when
our business is concluded."

Werper could scarce disguise the joy with which he received this
welcome decision.  And that he did entirely disguise it from the keen
and suspicious eyes of Achmet Zek is open to question.  However, the
decision reached, the Arab and his lieutenant discussed the details of
their forthcoming ventures for a short time further, when Werper made
his excuses and returned to his own tent for the comforts and luxury of
a long-desired bath and shave.

Having bathed, the Belgian tied a small hand mirror to a cord sewn to
the rear wall of his tent, placed a rude chair beside an equally rude
table that stood beside the glass, and proceeded to remove the rough
stubble from his face.

In the catalog of masculine pleasures there is scarce one which imparts
a feeling of greater comfort and refreshment than follows a clean
shave, and now, with weariness temporarily banished, Albert Werper
sprawled in his rickety chair to enjoy a final cigaret before retiring.
His thumbs, tucked in his belt in lazy support of the weight of his
arms, touched the belt which held the jewel pouch about his waist.  He
tingled with excitement as he let his mind dwell upon the value of the
treasure, which, unknown to all save himself, lay hidden beneath his
clothing.

What would Achmet Zek say, if he knew?  Werper grinned.  How the old
rascal's eyes would pop could he but have a glimpse of those
scintillating beauties!  Werper had never yet had an opportunity to
feast his eyes for any great length of time upon them.  He had not even
counted them--only roughly had he guessed at their value.

He unfastened the belt and drew the pouch from its hiding place.  He
was alone.  The balance of the camp, save the sentries, had
retired--none would enter the Belgian's tent.  He fingered the pouch,
feeling out the shapes and sizes of the precious, little nodules
within.  He hefted the bag, first in one palm, then in the other, and
at last he wheeled his chair slowly around before the table, and in the
rays of his small lamp let the glittering gems roll out upon the rough
wood.

The refulgent rays transformed the interior of the soiled and squalid
canvas to the splendor of a palace in the eyes of the dreaming man.  He
saw the gilded halls of pleasure that would open their portals to the
possessor of the wealth which lay scattered upon this stained and
dented table top.  He dreamed of joys and luxuries and power which
always had been beyond his grasp, and as he dreamed his gaze lifted
from the table, as the gaze of a dreamer will, to a far distant goal
above the mean horizon of terrestrial commonplaceness.

Unseeing, his eyes rested upon the shaving mirror which still hung upon
the tent wall above the table; but his sight was focused far beyond.
And then a reflection moved within the polished surface of the tiny
glass, the man's eyes shot back out of space to the mirror's face, and
in it he saw reflected the grim visage of Achmet Zek, framed in the
flaps of the tent doorway behind him.

Werper stifled a gasp of dismay.  With rare self-possession he let his
gaze drop, without appearing to have halted upon the mirror until it
rested again upon the gems.  Without haste, he replaced them in the
pouch, tucked the latter into his shirt, selected a cigaret from his
case, lighted it and rose.  Yawning, and stretching his arms above his
head, he turned slowly toward the opposite end of the tent.  The face
of Achmet Zek had disappeared from the opening.

To say that Albert Werper was terrified would be putting it mildly.  He
realized that he not only had sacrificed his treasure; but his life as
well.  Achmet Zek would never permit the wealth that he had discovered
to slip through his fingers, nor would he forgive the duplicity of a
lieutenant who had gained possession of such a treasure without
offering to share it with his chief.

Slowly the Belgian prepared for bed.  If he were being watched, he
could not know; but if so the watcher saw no indication of the nervous
excitement which the European strove to conceal.  When ready for his
blankets, the man crossed to the little table and extinguished the
light.

It was two hours later that the flaps at the front of the tent
separated silently and gave entrance to a dark-robed figure, which
passed noiselessly from the darkness without to the darkness within.
Cautiously the prowler crossed the interior.  In one hand was a long
knife.  He came at last to the pile of blankets spread upon several
rugs close to one of the tent walls.

Lightly, his fingers sought and found the bulk beneath the
blankets--the bulk that should be Albert Werper.  They traced out the
figure of a man, and then an arm shot upward, poised for an instant and
descended.  Again and again it rose and fell, and each time the long
blade of the knife buried itself in the thing beneath the blankets.
But there was an initial lifelessness in the silent bulk that gave the
assassin momentary wonder.  Feverishly he threw back the coverlets, and
searched with nervous hands for the pouch of jewels which he expected
to find concealed upon his victim's body.

An instant later he rose with a curse upon his lips.  It was Achmet
Zek, and he cursed because he had discovered beneath the blankets of
his lieutenant only a pile of discarded clothing arranged in the form
and semblance of a sleeping man--Albert Werper had fled.

Out into the village ran the chief, calling in angry tones to the
sleepy Arabs, who tumbled from their tents in answer to his voice.  But
though they searched the village again and again they found no trace of
the Belgian.  Foaming with anger, Achmet Zek called his followers to
horse, and though the night was pitchy black they set out to scour the
adjoining forest for their quarry.

As they galloped from the open gates, Mugambi, hiding in a nearby bush,
slipped, unseen, within the palisade.  A score of blacks crowded about
the entrance to watch the searchers depart, and as the last of them
passed out of the village the blacks seized the portals and drew them
to, and Mugambi lent a hand in the work as though the best of his life
had been spent among the raiders.

In the darkness he passed, unchallenged, as one of their number, and as
they returned from the gates to their respective tents and huts,
Mugambi melted into the shadows and disappeared.

For an hour he crept about in the rear of the various huts and tents in
an effort to locate that in which his master's mate was imprisoned.
One there was which he was reasonably assured contained her, for it was
the only hut before the door of which a sentry had been posted.
Mugambi was crouching in the shadow of this structure, just around the
corner from the unsuspecting guard, when another approached to relieve
his comrade.

"The prisoner is safe within?" asked the newcomer.

"She is," replied the other, "for none has passed this doorway since I
came."

The new sentry squatted beside the door, while he whom he had relieved
made his way to his own hut.  Mugambi slunk closer to the corner of the
building.  In one powerful hand he gripped a heavy knob-stick.  No sign
of elation disturbed his phlegmatic calm, yet inwardly he was aroused
to joy by the proof he had just heard that "Lady" really was within.

The sentry's back was toward the corner of the hut which hid the giant
black.  The fellow did not see the huge form which silently loomed
behind him.  The knob-stick swung upward in a curve, and downward
again.  There was the sound of a dull thud, the crushing of heavy bone,
and the sentry slumped into a silent, inanimate lump of clay.

A moment later Mugambi was searching the interior of the hut.  At first
slowly, calling, "Lady!" in a low whisper, and finally with almost
frantic haste, until the truth presently dawned upon him--the hut was
empty!




11

Tarzan Becomes a Beast Again


For a moment Werper had stood above the sleeping ape-man, his murderous
knife poised for the fatal thrust; but fear stayed his hand.  What if
the first blow should fail to drive the point to his victim's heart?
Werper shuddered in contemplation of the disastrous consequences to
himself.  Awakened, and even with a few moments of life remaining, the
giant could literally tear his assailant to pieces should he choose,
and the Belgian had no doubt but that Tarzan would so choose.

Again came the soft sound of padded footsteps in the reeds--closer this
time.  Werper abandoned his design.  Before him stretched the wide
plain and escape.  The jewels were in his possession.  To remain longer
was to risk death at the hands of Tarzan, or the jaws of the hunter
creeping ever nearer.  Turning, he slunk away through the night, toward
the distant forest.

Tarzan slept on.  Where were those uncanny, guardian powers that had
formerly rendered him immune from the dangers of surprise?  Could this
dull sleeper be the alert, sensitive Tarzan of old?

Perhaps the blow upon his head had numbed his senses, temporarily--who
may say?  Closer crept the stealthy creature through the reeds.  The
rustling curtain of vegetation parted a few paces from where the
sleeper lay, and the massive head of a lion appeared.  The beast
surveyed the ape-man intently for a moment, then he crouched, his hind
feet drawn well beneath him, his tail lashing from side to side.

It was the beating of the beast's tail against the reeds which awakened
Tarzan.  Jungle folk do not awaken slowly--instantly, full
consciousness and full command of their every faculty returns to them
from the depth of profound slumber.

Even as Tarzan opened his eyes he was upon his feet, his spear grasped
firmly in his hand and ready for attack.  Again was he Tarzan of the
Apes, sentient, vigilant, ready.

No two lions have identical characteristics, nor does the same lion
invariably act similarly under like circumstances.  Whether it was
surprise, fear or caution which prompted the lion crouching ready to
spring upon the man, is immaterial--the fact remains that he did not
carry out his original design, he did not spring at the man at all,
but, instead, wheeled and sprang back into the reeds as Tarzan arose
and confronted him.

The ape-man shrugged his broad shoulders and looked about for his
companion.  Werper was nowhere to be seen.  At first Tarzan suspected
that the man had been seized and dragged off by another lion, but upon
examination of the ground he soon discovered that the Belgian had gone
away alone out into the plain.

For a moment he was puzzled; but presently came to the conclusion that
Werper had been frightened by the approach of the lion, and had sneaked
off in terror.  A sneer touched Tarzan's lips as he pondered the man's
act--the desertion of a comrade in time of danger, and without warning.
Well, if that was the sort of creature Werper was, Tarzan wished
nothing more of him.  He had gone, and for all the ape-man cared, he
might remain away--Tarzan would not search for him.

A hundred yards from where he stood grew a large tree, alone upon the
edge of the reedy jungle.  Tarzan made his way to it, clambered into
it, and finding a comfortable crotch among its branches, reposed
himself for uninterrupted sleep until morning.

And when morning came Tarzan slept on long after the sun had risen.
His mind, reverted to the primitive, was untroubled by any more serious
obligations than those of providing sustenance, and safeguarding his
life.  Therefore, there was nothing to awaken for until danger
threatened, or the pangs of hunger assailed.  It was the latter which
eventually aroused him.

Opening his eyes, he stretched his giant thews, yawned, rose and gazed
about him through the leafy foliage of his retreat.  Across the wasted
meadowlands and fields of John Clayton, Lord Greystoke, Tarzan of the
Apes looked, as a stranger, upon the moving figures of Basuli and his
braves as they prepared their morning meal and made ready to set out
upon the expedition which Basuli had planned after discovering the
havoc and disaster which had befallen the estate of his dead master.

The ape-man eyed the blacks with curiosity.  In the back of his brain
loitered a fleeting sense of familiarity with all that he saw, yet he
could not connect any of the various forms of life, animate and
inanimate, which had fallen within the range of his vision since he had
emerged from the darkness of the pits of Opar, with any particular
event of the past.

Hazily he recalled a grim and hideous form, hairy, ferocious.  A vague
tenderness dominated his savage sentiments as this phantom memory
struggled for recognition.  His mind had reverted to his childhood
days--it was the figure of the giant she-ape, Kala, that he saw; but
only half recognized.  He saw, too, other grotesque, manlike forms.
They were of Terkoz, Tublat, Kerchak, and a smaller, less ferocious
figure, that was Neeta, the little playmate of his boyhood.

Slowly, very slowly, as these visions of the past animated his
lethargic memory, he came to recognize them.  They took definite shape
and form, adjusting themselves nicely to the various incidents of his
life with which they had been intimately connected.  His boyhood among
the apes spread itself in a slow panorama before him, and as it
unfolded it induced within him a mighty longing for the companionship
of the shaggy, low-browed brutes of his past.

He watched the blacks scatter their cook fire and depart; but though
the face of each of them had but recently been as familiar to him as
his own, they awakened within him no recollections whatsoever.

When they had gone, he descended from the tree and sought food.  Out
upon the plain grazed numerous herds of wild ruminants.  Toward a
sleek, fat bunch of zebra he wormed his stealthy way.  No intricate
process of reasoning caused him to circle widely until he was down wind
from his prey--he acted instinctively.  He took advantage of every form
of cover as he crawled upon all fours and often flat upon his stomach
toward them.

A plump young mare and a fat stallion grazed nearest to him as he
neared the herd.  Again it was instinct which selected the former for
his meat.  A low bush grew but a few yards from the unsuspecting two.
The ape-man reached its shelter.  He gathered his spear firmly in his
grasp.  Cautiously he drew his feet beneath him.  In a single swift
move he rose and cast his heavy weapon at the mare's side.  Nor did he
wait to note the effect of his assault, but leaped cat-like after his
spear, his hunting knife in his hand.

For an instant the two animals stood motionless.  The tearing of the
cruel barb into her side brought a sudden scream of pain and fright
from the mare, and then they both wheeled and broke for safety; but
Tarzan of the Apes, for a distance of a few yards, could equal the
speed of even these, and the first stride of the mare found her
overhauled, with a savage beast at her shoulder.  She turned, biting
and kicking at her foe.  Her mate hesitated for an instant, as though
about to rush to her assistance; but a backward glance revealed to him
the flying heels of the balance of the herd, and with a snort and a
shake of his head he wheeled and dashed away.

Clinging with one hand to the short mane of his quarry, Tarzan struck
again and again with his knife at the unprotected heart.  The result
had, from the first, been inevitable.  The mare fought bravely, but
hopelessly, and presently sank to the earth, her heart pierced.  The
ape-man placed a foot upon her carcass and raised his voice in the
victory call of the Mangani.  In the distance, Basuli halted as the
faint notes of the hideous scream broke upon his ears.

"The great apes," he said to his companion.  "It has been long since I
have heard them in the country of the Waziri.  What could have brought
them back?"

Tarzan grasped his kill and dragged it to the partial seclusion of the
bush which had hidden his own near approach, and there he squatted upon
it, cut a huge hunk of flesh from the loin and proceeded to satisfy his
hunger with the warm and dripping meat.

Attracted by the shrill screams of the mare, a pair of hyenas slunk
presently into view.  They trotted to a point a few yards from the
gorging ape-man, and halted.  Tarzan looked up, bared his fighting
fangs and growled.  The hyenas returned the compliment, and withdrew a
couple of paces.  They made no move to attack; but continued to sit at
a respectful distance until Tarzan had concluded his meal.  After the
ape-man had cut a few strips from the carcass to carry with him, he
walked slowly off in the direction of the river to quench his thirst.
His way lay directly toward the hyenas, nor did he alter his course
because of them.

With all the lordly majesty of Numa, the lion, he strode straight
toward the growling beasts.  For a moment they held their ground,
bristling and defiant; but only for a moment, and then slunk away to
one side while the indifferent ape-man passed them on his lordly way.
A moment later they were tearing at the remains of the zebra.

Back to the reeds went Tarzan, and through them toward the river.  A
herd of buffalo, startled by his approach, rose ready to charge or to
fly.  A great bull pawed the ground and bellowed as his bloodshot eyes
discovered the intruder; but the ape-man passed across their front as
though ignorant of their existence.  The bull's bellowing lessened to a
low rumbling, he turned and scraped a horde of flies from his side with
his muzzle, cast a final glance at the ape-man and resumed his feeding.
His numerous family either followed his example or stood gazing after
Tarzan in mild-eyed curiosity, until the opposite reeds swallowed him
from view.

At the river, Tarzan drank his fill and bathed.  During the heat of the
day he lay up under the shade of a tree near the ruins of his burned
barns.  His eyes wandered out across the plain toward the forest, and a
longing for the pleasures of its mysterious depths possessed his
thoughts for a considerable time.  With the next sun he would cross the
open and enter the forest!  There was no hurry--there lay before him an
endless vista of tomorrows with naught to fill them but the satisfying
of the appetites and caprices of the moment.

The ape-man's mind was untroubled by regret for the past, or aspiration
for the future.  He could lie at full length along a swaying branch,
stretching his giant limbs, and luxuriating in the blessed peace of
utter thoughtlessness, without an apprehension or a worry to sap his
nervous energy and rob him of his peace of mind.  Recalling only dimly
any other existence, the ape-man was happy.  Lord Greystoke had ceased
to exist.

For several hours Tarzan lolled upon his swaying, leafy couch until
once again hunger and thirst suggested an excursion.  Stretching lazily
he dropped to the ground and moved slowly toward the river.  The game
trail down which he walked had become by ages of use a deep, narrow
trench, its walls topped on either side by impenetrable thicket and
dense-growing trees closely interwoven with thick-stemmed creepers and
lesser vines inextricably matted into two solid ramparts of vegetation.
Tarzan had almost reached the point where the trail debouched upon the
open river bottom when he saw a family of lions approaching along the
path from the direction of the river.  The ape-man counted seven--a
male and two lionesses, full grown, and four young lions as large and
quite as formidable as their parents.  Tarzan halted, growling, and the
lions paused, the great male in the lead baring his fangs and rumbling
forth a warning roar.  In his hand the ape-man held his heavy spear;
but he had no intention of pitting his puny weapon against seven lions;
yet he stood there growling and roaring and the lions did likewise.  It
was purely an exhibition of jungle bluff.  Each was trying to frighten
off the other.  Neither wished to turn back and give way, nor did
either at first desire to precipitate an encounter.  The lions were fed
sufficiently so as not to be goaded by pangs of hunger and as for
Tarzan he seldom ate the meat of the carnivores; but a point of ethics
was at stake and neither side wished to back down.  So they stood there
facing one another, making all sorts of hideous noises the while they
hurled jungle invective back and forth.  How long this bloodless duel
would have persisted it is difficult to say, though eventually Tarzan
would have been forced to yield to superior numbers.

There came, however, an interruption which put an end to the deadlock
and it came from Tarzan's rear.  He and the lions had been making so
much noise that neither could hear anything above their concerted
bedlam, and so it was that Tarzan did not hear the great bulk bearing
down upon him from behind until an instant before it was upon him, and
then he turned to see Buto, the rhinoceros, his little, pig eyes
blazing, charging madly toward him and already so close that escape
seemed impossible; yet so perfectly were mind and muscles coordinated
in this unspoiled, primitive man that almost simultaneously with the
sense perception of the threatened danger he wheeled and hurled his
spear at Buto's chest.  It was a heavy spear shod with iron, and behind
it were the giant muscles of the ape-man, while coming to meet it was
the enormous weight of Buto and the momentum of his rapid rush.  All
that happened in the instant that Tarzan turned to meet the charge of
the irascible rhinoceros might take long to tell, and yet would have
taxed the swiftest lens to record.  As his spear left his hand the
ape-man was looking down upon the mighty horn lowered to toss him, so
close was Buto to him.  The spear entered the rhinoceros' neck at its
junction with the left shoulder and passed almost entirely through the
beast's body, and at the instant that he launched it, Tarzan leaped
straight into the air alighting upon Buto's back but escaping the
mighty horn.

Then Buto espied the lions and bore madly down upon them while Tarzan
of the Apes leaped nimbly into the tangled creepers at one side of the
trail.  The first lion met Buto's charge and was tossed high over the
back of the maddened brute, torn and dying, and then the six remaining
lions were upon the rhinoceros, rending and tearing the while they were
being gored or trampled.  From the safety of his perch Tarzan watched
the royal battle with the keenest interest, for the more intelligent of
the jungle folk are interested in such encounters.  They are to them
what the racetrack and the prize ring, the theater and the movies are
to us. They see them often; but always they enjoy them for no two are
precisely alike.

For a time it seemed to Tarzan that Buto, the rhinoceros, would prove
victor in the gory battle.  Already had he accounted for four of the
seven lions and badly wounded the three remaining when in a momentary
lull in the encounter he sank limply to his knees and rolled over upon
his side.  Tarzan's spear had done its work.  It was the man-made
weapon which killed the great beast that might easily have survived the
assault of seven mighty lions, for Tarzan's spear had pierced the great
lungs, and Buto, with victory almost in sight, succumbed to internal
hemorrhage.

Then Tarzan came down from his sanctuary and as the wounded lions,
growling, dragged themselves away, the ape-man cut his spear from the
body of Buto, hacked off a steak and vanished into the jungle.  The
episode was over.  It had been all in the day's work--something which
you and I might talk about for a lifetime Tarzan dismissed from his
mind the moment that the scene passed from his sight.




12

La Seeks Vengeance


Swinging back through the jungle in a wide circle the ape-man came to
the river at another point, drank and took to the trees again and while
he hunted, all oblivious of his past and careless of his future, there
came through the dark jungles and the open, parklike places and across
the wide meadows, where grazed the countless herbivora of the
mysterious continent, a weird and terrible caravan in search of him.
There were fifty frightful men with hairy bodies and gnarled and
crooked legs.  They were armed with knives and great bludgeons and at
their head marched an almost naked woman, beautiful beyond compare.  It
was La of Opar, High Priestess of the Flaming God, and fifty of her
horrid priests searching for the purloiner of the sacred sacrificial
knife.

Never before had La passed beyond the crumbling outer walls of Opar;
but never before had need been so insistent.  The sacred knife was
gone!  Handed down through countless ages it had come to her as a
heritage and an insignia of her religious office and regal authority
from some long-dead progenitor of lost and forgotten Atlantis.  The
loss of the crown jewels or the Great Seal of England could have
brought no greater consternation to a British king than did the
pilfering of the sacred knife bring to La, the Oparian, Queen and High
Priestess of the degraded remnants of the oldest civilization upon
earth.  When Atlantis, with all her mighty cities and her cultivated
fields and her great commerce and culture and riches sank into the sea
long ages since, she took with her all but a handful of her colonists
working the vast gold mines of Central Africa.  From these and their
degraded slaves and a later intermixture of the blood of the
anthropoids sprung the gnarled men of Opar; but by some queer freak of
fate, aided by natural selection, the old Atlantean strain had remained
pure and undegraded in the females descended from a single princess of
the royal house of Atlantis who had been in Opar at the time of the
great catastrophe.  Such was La.

Burning with white-hot anger was the High Priestess, her heart a
seething, molten mass of hatred for Tarzan of the Apes.  The zeal of
the religious fanatic whose altar has been desecrated was triply
enhanced by the rage of a woman scorned.  Twice had she thrown her
heart at the feet of the godlike ape-man and twice had she been
repulsed.  La knew that she was beautiful--and she was beautiful, not
by the standards of prehistoric Atlantis alone, but by those of modern
times was La physically a creature of perfection.  Before Tarzan came
that first time to Opar, La had never seen a human male other than the
grotesque and knotted men of her clan.  With one of these she must mate
sooner or later that the direct line of high priestesses might not be
broken, unless Fate should bring other men to Opar.  Before Tarzan came
upon his first visit, La had had no thought that such men as he
existed, for she knew only her hideous little priests and the bulls of
the tribe of great anthropoids that had dwelt from time immemorial in
and about Opar, until they had come to be looked upon almost as equals
by the Oparians.  Among the legends of Opar were tales of godlike men
of the olden time and of black men who had come more recently; but
these latter had been enemies who killed and robbed.  And, too, these
legends always held forth the hope that some day that nameless
continent from which their race had sprung, would rise once more out of
the sea and with slaves at the long sweeps would send her carven,
gold-picked galleys forth to succor the long-exiled colonists.

The coming of Tarzan had aroused within La's breast the wild hope that
at last the fulfillment of this ancient prophecy was at hand; but more
strongly still had it aroused the hot fires of love in a heart that
never otherwise would have known the meaning of that all-consuming
passion, for such a wondrous creature as La could never have felt love
for any of the repulsive priests of Opar.  Custom, duty and religious
zeal might have commanded the union; but there could have been no love
on La's part.  She had grown to young womanhood a cold and heartless
creature, daughter of a thousand other cold, heartless, beautiful women
who had never known love.  And so when love came to her it liberated
all the pent passions of a thousand generations, transforming La into a
pulsing, throbbing volcano of desire, and with desire thwarted this
great force of love and gentleness and sacrifice was transmuted by its
own fires into one of hatred and revenge.

It was in a state of mind superinduced by these conditions that La led
forth her jabbering company to retrieve the sacred emblem of her high
office and wreak vengeance upon the author of her wrongs.  To Werper
she gave little thought.  The fact that the knife had been in his hand
when it departed from Opar brought down no thoughts of vengeance upon
his head.  Of course, he should be slain when captured; but his death
would give La no pleasure--she looked for that in the contemplated
death agonies of Tarzan.  He should be tortured.  His should be a slow
and frightful death.  His punishment should be adequate to the
immensity of his crime.  He had wrested the sacred knife from La; he
had lain sacrilegious hands upon the High Priestess of the Flaming God;
he had desecrated the altar and the temple.  For these things he should
die; but he had scorned the love of La, the woman, and for this he
should die horribly with great anguish.

The march of La and her priests was not without its adventures.  Unused
were these to the ways of the jungle, since seldom did any venture
forth from behind Opar's crumbling walls, yet their very numbers
protected them and so they came without fatalities far along the trail
of Tarzan and Werper.  Three great apes accompanied them and to these
was delegated the business of tracking the quarry, a feat beyond the
senses of the Oparians.  La commanded.  She arranged the order of
march, she selected the camps, she set the hour for halting and the
hour for resuming and though she was inexperienced in such matters, her
native intelligence was so far above that of the men or the apes that
she did better than they could have done.  She was a hard taskmaster,
too, for she looked down with loathing and contempt upon the misshapen
creatures amongst which cruel Fate had thrown her and to some extent
vented upon them her dissatisfaction and her thwarted love.  She made
them build her a strong protection and shelter each night and keep a
great fire burning before it from dusk to dawn.  When she tired of
walking they were forced to carry her upon an improvised litter, nor
did one dare to question her authority or her right to such services.
In fact they did not question either.  To them she was a goddess and
each loved her and each hoped that he would be chosen as her mate, so
they slaved for her and bore the stinging lash of her displeasure and
the habitually haughty disdain of her manner without a murmur.

For many days they marched, the apes following the trail easily and
going a little distance ahead of the body of the caravan that they
might warn the others of impending danger.  It was during a noonday
halt while all were lying resting after a tiresome march that one of
the apes rose suddenly and sniffed the breeze.  In a low guttural he
cautioned the others to silence and a moment later was swinging quietly
up wind into the jungle.  La and the priests gathered silently
together, the hideous little men fingering their knives and bludgeons,
and awaited the return of the shaggy anthropoid.

Nor had they long to wait before they saw him emerge from a leafy
thicket and approach them.  Straight to La he came and in the language
of the great apes which was also the language of decadent Opar he
addressed her.

"The great Tarmangani lies asleep there," he said, pointing in the
direction from which he had just come.  "Come and we can kill him."

"Do not kill him," commanded La in cold tones.  "Bring the great
Tarmangani to me alive and unhurt.  The vengeance is La's.  Go; but
make no sound!" and she waved her hands to include all her followers.

Cautiously the weird party crept through the jungle in the wake of the
great ape until at last he halted them with a raised hand and pointed
upward and a little ahead.  There they saw the giant form of the
ape-man stretched along a low bough and even in sleep one hand grasped
a stout limb and one strong, brown leg reached out and overlapped
another.  At ease lay Tarzan of the Apes, sleeping heavily upon a full
stomach and dreaming of Numa, the lion, and Horta, the boar, and other
creatures of the jungle.  No intimation of danger assailed the dormant
faculties of the ape-man--he saw no crouching hairy figures upon the
ground beneath him nor the three apes that swung quietly into the  tree
beside him.

The first intimation of danger that came to Tarzan was the impact of
three bodies as the three apes leaped upon him and hurled him to the
ground, where he alighted half stunned beneath their combined weight
and was immediately set upon by the fifty hairy men or as many of them
as could swarm upon his person.  Instantly the ape-man became the
center of a whirling, striking, biting maelstrom of horror.  He fought
nobly but the odds against him were too great.  Slowly they overcame
him though there was scarce one of them that did not feel the weight of
his mighty fist or the rending of his fangs.




13

Condemned To Torture and Death


La had followed her company and when she saw them clawing and biting at
Tarzan, she raised her voice and cautioned them not to kill him.  She
saw that he was weakening and that soon the greater numbers would
prevail over him, nor had she long to wait before the mighty jungle
creature lay helpless and bound at her feet.

"Bring him to the place at which we stopped," she commanded and they
carried Tarzan back to the little clearing and threw him down beneath a
tree.

"Build me a shelter!" ordered La.  "We shall stop here tonight and
tomorrow in the face of the Flaming God, La will offer up the heart of
this defiler of the temple.  Where is the sacred knife?  Who took it
from him?"

But no one had seen it and each was positive in his assurance that the
sacrificial weapon had not been upon Tarzan's person when they captured
him.  The ape-man looked upon the menacing creatures which surrounded
him and snarled his defiance.  He looked upon La and smiled.  In the
face of death he was unafraid.

"Where is the knife?" La asked him.

"I do not know," replied Tarzan.  "The man took it with him when he
slipped away during the night.  Since you are so desirous for its
return I would look for him and get it back for you, did you not hold
me prisoner; but now that I am to die I cannot get it back.  Of what
good was your knife, anyway?  You can make another.  Did you follow us
all this way for nothing more than a knife?  Let me go and find him and
I will bring it back to you."

La laughed a bitter laugh, for in her heart she knew that Tarzan's sin
was greater than the purloining of the sacrificial knife of Opar; yet
as she looked at him lying bound and helpless before her, tears rose to
her eyes so that she had to turn away to hide them; but she remained
inflexible in her determination to make him pay in frightful suffering
and in eventual death for daring to spurn the love of La.

When the shelter was completed La had Tarzan transferred to it.  "All
night I shall torture him," she muttered to her priests, "and at the
first streak of dawn you may prepare the flaming altar upon which his
heart shall be offered up to the Flaming God.  Gather wood well filled
with pitch, lay it in the form and size of the altar at Opar in the
center of the clearing that the Flaming God may look down upon our
handiwork and be pleased."

During the balance of the day the priests of Opar were busy erecting an
altar in the center of the clearing, and while they worked they chanted
weird hymns in the ancient tongue of that lost continent that lies at
the bottom of the Atlantic.  They knew not the meanings of the words
they mouthed; they but repeated the ritual that had been handed down
from preceptor to neophyte since that long-gone day when the ancestors
of the Piltdown man still swung by their tails in the humid jungles
that are England now.

And in the shelter of the hut, La paced to and fro beside the stoic
ape-man.  Resigned to his fate was Tarzan.  No hope of succor gleamed
through the dead black of the death sentence hanging over him.  He knew
that his giant muscles could not part the many strands that bound his
wrists and ankles, for he had strained often, but ineffectually for
release.  He had no hope of outside help and only enemies surrounded
him within the camp, and yet he smiled at La as she paced nervously
back and forth the length of the shelter.

And La?  She fingered her knife and looked down upon her captive.  She
glared and muttered but she did not strike.  "Tonight!" she thought.
"Tonight, when it is dark I will torture him." She looked upon his
perfect, godlike figure and upon his handsome, smiling face and then
she steeled her heart again by thoughts of her love spurned; by
religious thoughts that damned the infidel who had desecrated the holy
of holies; who had taken from the blood-stained altar of Opar the
offering to the Flaming God--and not once but thrice.  Three times had
Tarzan cheated the god of her fathers.  At the thought La paused and
knelt at his side.  In her hand was a sharp knife.  She placed its
point against the ape-man's side and pressed upon the hilt; but Tarzan
only smiled and shrugged his shoulders.

How beautiful he was!  La bent low over him, looking into his eyes.
How perfect was his figure.  She compared it with those of the knurled
and knotted men from whom she must choose a mate, and La shuddered at
the thought.  Dusk came and after dusk came night.  A great fire blazed
within the little thorn boma about the camp.  The flames played upon
the new altar erected in the center of the clearing, arousing in the
mind of the High Priestess of the Flaming God a picture of the event of
the coming dawn.  She saw this giant and perfect form writhing amid the
flames of the burning pyre.  She saw those smiling lips, burned and
blackened, falling away from the strong, white teeth.  She saw the
shock of black hair tousled upon Tarzan's well-shaped head disappear in
a spurt of flame.  She saw these and many other frightful pictures as
she stood with closed eyes and clenched fists above the object of her
hate--ah!  was it hate that La of Opar felt?

The darkness of the jungle night had settled down upon the camp,
relieved only by the fitful flarings of the fire that was kept up to
warn off the man-eaters.  Tarzan lay quietly in his bonds.  He suffered
from thirst and from the cutting of the tight strands about his wrists
and ankles; but he made no complaint.  A jungle beast was Tarzan with
the stoicism of the beast and the intelligence of man.  He knew that
his doom was sealed--that no supplications would avail to temper the
severity of his end and so he wasted no breath in pleadings; but waited
patiently in the firm conviction that his sufferings could not endure
forever.

In the darkness La stooped above him.  In her hand was a sharp knife
and in her mind the determination to initiate his torture without
further delay.  The knife was pressed against his side and La's face
was close to his when a sudden burst of flame from new branches thrown
upon the fire without, lighted up the interior of the shelter.  Close
beneath her lips La saw the perfect features of the forest god and into
her woman's heart welled all the great love she had felt for Tarzan
since first she had seen him, and all the accumulated passion of the
years that she had dreamed of him.

Dagger in hand, La, the High Priestess, towered above the helpless
creature that had dared to violate the sanctuary of her deity.  There
should be no torture--there should be instant death.  No longer should
the defiler of the temple pollute the sight of the lord god almighty.
A single stroke of the heavy blade and then the corpse to the flaming
pyre without.  The knife arm stiffened ready for the downward plunge,
and then La, the woman, collapsed weakly upon the body of the man she
loved.

She ran her hands in mute caress over his naked flesh; she covered his
forehead, his eyes, his lips with hot kisses; she covered him with her
body as though to protect him from the hideous fate she had ordained
for him, and in trembling, piteous tones she begged him for his love.
For hours the frenzy of her passion possessed the burning hand-maiden
of the Flaming God, until at last sleep overpowered her and she lapsed
into unconsciousness beside the man she had sworn to torture and to
slay.  And Tarzan, untroubled by thoughts of the future, slept
peacefully in La's embrace.

At the first hint of dawn the chanting of the priests of Opar brought
Tarzan to wakefulness.  Initiated in low and subdued tones, the sound
soon rose in volume to the open diapason of barbaric blood lust.  La
stirred.  Her perfect arm pressed Tarzan closer to her--a smile parted
her lips and then she awoke, and slowly the smile faded and her eyes
went wide in horror as the significance of the death chant impinged
upon her understanding.

"Love me, Tarzan!" she cried.  "Love me, and you shall be saved."

Tarzan's bonds hurt him.  He was suffering the tortures of
long-restricted circulation.  With an angry growl he rolled over with
his back toward La.  That was her answer!  The High Priestess leaped to
her feet.  A hot flush of shame mantled her cheek and then she went
dead white and stepped to the shelter's entrance.

"Come, Priests of the Flaming God!" she cried, "and make ready the
sacrifice."

The warped things advanced and entered the shelter.  They laid hands
upon Tarzan and bore him forth, and as they chanted they kept time with
their crooked bodies, swaying to and fro to the rhythm of their song of
blood and death.  Behind them came La, swaying too; but not in unison
with the chanted cadence.  White and drawn was the face of the High
Priestess--white and drawn with unrequited love and hideous terror of
the moments to come.  Yet stern in her resolve was La.  The infidel
should die!  The scorner of her love should pay the price upon the
fiery altar.  She saw them lay the perfect body there upon the rough
branches.  She saw the High Priest, he to whom custom would unite
her--bent, crooked, gnarled, stunted, hideous--advance with the flaming
torch and stand awaiting her command to apply it to the faggots
surrounding the sacrificial pyre.  His hairy, bestial face was
distorted in a yellow-fanged grin of anticipatory enjoyment.  His hands
were cupped to receive the life blood of the victim--the red nectar
that at Opar would have filled the golden sacrificial goblets.

La approached with upraised knife, her face turned toward the rising
sun and upon her lips a prayer to the burning deity of her people.  The
High Priest looked questioningly toward her--the brand was burning
close to his hand and the faggots lay temptingly near.  Tarzan closed
his eyes and awaited the end.  He knew that he would suffer, for he
recalled the faint memories of past burns.  He knew that he would
suffer and die; but he did not flinch.  Death is no great adventure to
the jungle bred who walk hand-in-hand with the grim specter by day and
lie down at his side by night through all the years of their lives.  It
is doubtful that the ape-man even speculated upon what came after
death.  As a matter of fact as his end approached, his mind was
occupied by thoughts of the pretty pebbles he had lost, yet his every
faculty still was open to what passed around him.

He felt La lean over him and he opened his eyes.  He saw her white,
drawn face and he saw tears blinding her eyes.  "Tarzan, my Tarzan!"
she moaned, "tell me that you love me--that you will return to Opar
with me--and you shall live.  Even in the face of the anger of my
people I will save you.  This last chance I give you.  What is your
answer?"

At the last moment the woman in La had triumphed over the High
Priestess of a cruel cult.  She saw upon the altar the only creature
that ever had aroused the fires of love within her virgin breast; she
saw the beast-faced fanatic who would one day be her mate, unless she
found another less repulsive, standing with the burning torch ready to
ignite the pyre; yet with all her mad passion for the ape-man she would
give the word to apply the flame if Tarzan's final answer was
unsatisfactory.  With heaving bosom she leaned close above him.  "Yes
or no?" she whispered.

Through the jungle, out of the distance, came faintly a sound that
brought a sudden light of hope to Tarzan's eyes.  He raised his voice
in a weird scream that sent La back from him a step or two.  The
impatient priest grumbled and switched the torch from one hand to the
other at the same time holding it closer to the tinder at the base of
the pyre.

"Your answer!" insisted La.  "What is your answer to the love of La of
Opar?"

Closer came the sound that had attracted Tarzan's attention and now the
others heard it--the shrill trumpeting of an elephant.  As La looked
wide-eyed into Tarzan's face, there to read her fate for happiness or
heartbreak, she saw an expression of concern shadow his features.  Now,
for the first time, she guessed the meaning of Tarzan's shrill
scream--he had summoned Tantor, the elephant, to his rescue!  La's
brows contracted in a savage scowl.  "You refuse La!" she cried.  "Then
die!  The torch!" she commanded, turning toward the priest.

Tarzan looked up into her face.  "Tantor is coming," he said.  "I
thought that he would rescue me; but I know now from his voice that he
will slay me and you and all that fall in his path, searching out with
the cunning of Sheeta, the panther, those who would hide from him, for
Tantor is mad with the madness of love."

La knew only too well the insane ferocity of a bull elephant in MUST.
She knew that Tarzan had not exaggerated.  She knew that the devil in
the cunning, cruel brain of the great beast might send it hither and
thither hunting through the forest for those who escaped its first
charge, or the beast might pass on without returning--no one might
guess which.

"I cannot love you, La," said Tarzan in a low voice.  "I do not know
why, for you are very beautiful.  I could not go back and live in
Opar--I who have the whole broad jungle for my range.  No, I cannot
love you but I cannot see you die beneath the goring tusks of mad
Tantor.  Cut my bonds before it is too late.  Already he is almost upon
us.  Cut them and I may yet save you."

A little spiral of curling smoke rose from one corner of the pyre--the
flames licked upward, crackling.  La stood there like a beautiful
statue of despair gazing at Tarzan and at the spreading flames.  In a
moment they would reach out and grasp him.  From the tangled forest
came the sound of cracking limbs and crashing trunks--Tantor was coming
down upon them, a huge Juggernaut of the jungle.  The priests were
becoming uneasy.  They cast apprehensive glances in the direction of
the approaching elephant and then back at La.

"Fly!" she commanded them and then she stooped and cut the bonds
securing her prisoner's feet and hands.  In an instant Tarzan was upon
the ground.  The priests screamed out their rage and disappointment.
He with the torch took a menacing step toward La and the ape-man.
"Traitor!" He shrieked at the woman.  "For this you too shall die!"
Raising his bludgeon he rushed upon the High Priestess; but Tarzan was
there before her.  Leaping in to close quarters the ape-man seized the
upraised weapon and wrenched it from the hands of the frenzied fanatic
and then the priest closed upon him with tooth and nail.  Seizing the
stocky, stunted body in his mighty hands Tarzan raised the creature
high above his head, hurling him at his fellows who were now gathered
ready to bear down upon their erstwhile captive.  La stood proudly with
ready knife behind the ape-man.  No faint sign of fear marked her
perfect brow--only haughty disdain for her priests and admiration for
the man she loved so hopelessly filled her thoughts.

Suddenly upon this scene burst the mad bull--a huge tusker, his little
eyes inflamed with insane rage.  The priests stood for an instant
paralyzed with terror; but Tarzan turned and gathering La in his arms
raced for the nearest tree.  Tantor bore down upon him trumpeting
shrilly.  La clung with both white arms about the ape-man's neck.  She
felt him leap into the air and marveled at his strength and his ability
as, burdened with her weight, he swung nimbly into the lower branches
of a large tree and quickly bore her upward beyond reach of the sinuous
trunk of the pachyderm.

Momentarily baffled here, the huge elephant wheeled and bore down upon
the hapless priests who had now scattered, terror-stricken, in every
direction.  The nearest he gored and threw high among the branches of a
tree.  One he seized in the coils of his trunk and broke upon a huge
bole, dropping the mangled pulp to charge, trumpeting, after another.
Two he trampled beneath his huge feet and by then the others had
disappeared into the jungle.  Now Tantor turned his attention once more
to Tarzan for one of the symptoms of madness is a revulsion of
affection--objects of sane love become the objects of insane hatred.
Peculiar in the unwritten annals of the jungle was the proverbial love
that had existed between the ape-man and the tribe of Tantor.  No
elephant in all the jungle would harm the Tarmangani--the white-ape;
but with the madness of MUST upon him the great bull sought to destroy
his long-time play-fellow.

Back to the tree where La and Tarzan perched came Tantor, the elephant.
He reared up with his forefeet against the bole and reached high toward
them with his long trunk; but Tarzan had foreseen this and clambered
beyond the bull's longest reach.  Failure but tended to further enrage
the mad creature.  He bellowed and trumpeted and screamed until the
earth shook to the mighty volume of his noise.  He put his head against
the tree and pushed and the tree bent before his mighty strength; yet
still it held.

The actions of Tarzan were peculiar in the extreme.  Had Numa, or
Sabor, or Sheeta, or any other beast of the jungle been seeking to
destroy him, the ape-man would have danced about hurling missiles and
invectives at his assailant.  He would have insulted and taunted them,
reviling in the jungle Billingsgate he knew so well; but now he sat
silent out of Tantor's reach and upon his handsome face was an
expression of deep sorrow and pity, for of all the jungle folk Tarzan
loved Tantor the best.  Could he have slain him he would not have
thought of doing so.  His one idea was to escape, for he knew that with
the passing of the MUST Tantor would be sane again and that once more
he might stretch at full length upon that mighty back and make foolish
speech into those great, flapping ears.

Finding that the tree would not fall to his pushing, Tantor was but
enraged the more.  He looked up at the two perched high above him, his
red-rimmed eyes blazing with insane hatred, and then he wound his trunk
about the bole of the tree, spread his giant feet wide apart and tugged
to uproot the jungle giant.  A huge creature was Tantor, an enormous
bull in the full prime of all his stupendous strength.  Mightily he
strove until presently, to Tarzan's consternation, the great tree gave
slowly at the roots.  The ground rose in little mounds and ridges about
the base of the bole, the tree tilted--in another moment it would be
uprooted and fall.

The ape-man whirled La to his back and just as the tree inclined slowly
in its first movement out of the perpendicular, before the sudden rush
of its final collapse, he swung to the branches of a lesser neighbor.
It was a long and perilous leap.  La closed her eyes and shuddered; but
when she opened them again she found herself safe and Tarzan whirling
onward through the forest.  Behind them the uprooted tree crashed
heavily to the ground, carrying with it the lesser trees in its path
and then Tantor, realizing that his prey had escaped him, set up once
more his hideous trumpeting and followed at a rapid charge upon their
trail.




14

A Priestess But Yet a Woman


At first La closed her eyes and clung to Tarzan in terror, though she
made no outcry; but presently she gained sufficient courage to look
about her, to look down at the ground beneath and even to keep her eyes
open during the wide, perilous swings from tree to tree, and then there
came over her a sense of safety because of her confidence in the
perfect physical creature in whose strength and nerve and agility her
fate lay.  Once she raised her eyes to the burning sun and murmured a
prayer of thanks to her pagan god that she had not been permitted to
destroy this godlike man, and her long lashes were wet with tears.  A
strange anomaly was La of Opar--a creature of circumstance torn by
conflicting emotions.  Now the cruel and bloodthirsty creature of a
heartless god and again a melting woman filled with compassion and
tenderness.  Sometimes the incarnation of jealousy and revenge and
sometimes a sobbing maiden, generous and forgiving; at once a virgin
and a wanton; but always--a woman.  Such was La.

She pressed her cheek close to Tarzan's shoulder.  Slowly she turned
her head until her hot lips were pressed against his flesh.  She loved
him and would gladly have died for him; yet within an hour she had been
ready to plunge a knife into his heart and might again within the
coming hour.

A hapless priest seeking shelter in the jungle chanced to show himself
to enraged Tantor.  The great beast turned to one side, bore down upon
the crooked, little man, snuffed him out and then, diverted from his
course, blundered away toward the south.  In a few minutes even the
noise of his trumpeting was lost in the distance.

Tarzan dropped to the ground and La slipped to her feet from his back.
"Call your people together," said Tarzan.

"They will kill me," replied La.

"They will not kill you," contradicted the ape-man.  "No one will kill
you while Tarzan of the Apes is here.  Call them and we will talk with
them."

La raised her voice in a weird, flutelike call that carried far into
the jungle on every side.  From near and far came answering shouts in
the barking tones of the Oparian priests: "We come!  We come!" Again
and again, La repeated her summons until singly and in pairs the
greater portion of her following approached and halted a short distance
away from the High Priestess and her savior.  They came with scowling
brows and threatening mien.  When all had come Tarzan addressed them.

"Your La is safe," said the ape-man.  "Had she slain me she would now
herself be dead and many more of you; but she spared me that I might
save her.  Go your way with her back to Opar, and Tarzan will go his
way into the jungle. Let there be peace always between Tarzan and La.
What is your answer?"

The priests grumbled and shook their heads.  They spoke together and La
and Tarzan could see that they were not favorably inclined toward the
proposition.  They did not wish to take La back and they did wish to
complete the sacrifice of Tarzan to the Flaming God.  At last the
ape-man became impatient.

"You will obey the commands of your queen," he said, "and go back to
Opar with her or Tarzan of the Apes will call together the other
creatures of the jungle and slay you all.  La saved me that I might
save you and her.  I have served you better alive than I could have
dead.  If you are not all fools you will let me go my way in peace and
you will return to Opar with La.  I know not where the sacred knife is;
but you can fashion another.  Had I not taken it from La you would have
slain me and now your god must be glad that I took it since I have
saved his priestess from love-mad Tantor.  Will you go back to Opar
with La, promising that no harm shall befall her?"

The priests gathered together in a little knot arguing and discussing.
They pounded upon their breasts with their fists; they raised their
hands and eyes to their fiery god; they growled and barked among
themselves until it became evident to Tarzan that one of their number
was preventing the acceptance of his proposal.  This was the High
Priest whose heart was filled with jealous rage because La openly
acknowledged her love for the stranger, when by the worldly customs of
their cult she should have belonged to him. Seemingly there was to be
no solution of the problem until another priest stepped forth and,
raising his hand, addressed La.

"Cadj, the High Priest," he announced, "would sacrifice you both to the
Flaming God; but all of us except Cadj would gladly return to Opar with
our queen."

"You are many against one," spoke up Tarzan.  "Why should you not have
your will?  Go your way with La to Opar and if Cadj interferes slay
him."

The priests of Opar welcomed this suggestion with loud cries of
approval.  To them it appeared nothing short of divine inspiration.
The influence of ages of unquestioning obedience to high priests had
made it seem impossible to them to question his authority; but when
they realized that they could force him to their will they were as
happy as children with new toys.

They rushed forward and seized Cadj.  They talked in loud menacing
tones into his ear.  They threatened him with bludgeon and knife until
at last he acquiesced in their demands, though sullenly, and then
Tarzan stepped close before Cadj.

"Priest," he said, "La goes back to her temple under the protection of
her priests and the threat of Tarzan of the Apes that whoever harms her
shall die.  Tarzan will go again to Opar before the next rains and if
harm has befallen La, woe betide Cadj, the High Priest."

Sullenly Cadj promised not to harm his queen.

"Protect her," cried Tarzan to the other Oparians.  "Protect her so
that when Tarzan comes again he will find La there to greet him."

"La will be there to greet thee," exclaimed the High Priestess, "and La
will wait, longing, always longing, until you come again.  Oh, tell me
that you will come!"

"Who knows?" asked the ape-man as he swung quickly into the trees and
raced off toward the east.

For a moment La stood looking after him, then her head drooped, a sigh
escaped her lips and like an old woman she took up the march toward
distant Opar.

Through the trees raced Tarzan of the Apes until the darkness of night
had settled upon the jungle, then he lay down and slept, with no
thought beyond the morrow and with even La but the shadow of a memory
within his consciousness.

But a few marches to the north Lady Greystoke looked forward to the day
when her mighty lord and master should discover the crime of Achmet
Zek, and be speeding to rescue and avenge, and even as she pictured the
coming of John Clayton, the object of her thoughts squatted almost
naked, beside a fallen log, beneath which he was searching with grimy
fingers for a chance beetle or a luscious grub.

Two days elapsed following the theft of the jewels before Tarzan gave
them a thought.  Then, as they chanced to enter his mind, he conceived
a desire to play with them again, and, having nothing better to do than
satisfy the first whim which possessed him, he rose and started across
the plain from the forest in which he had spent the preceding day.

Though no mark showed where the gems had been buried, and though the
spot resembled the balance of an unbroken stretch several miles in
length, where the reeds terminated at the edge of the meadowland, yet
the ape-man moved with unerring precision directly to the place where
he had hid his treasure.

With his hunting knife he upturned the loose earth, beneath which the
pouch should be; but, though he excavated to a greater distance than
the depth of the original hole there was no sign of pouch or jewels.
Tarzan's brow clouded as he discovered that he had been despoiled.
Little or no reasoning was required to convince him of the identity of
the guilty party, and with the same celerity that had marked his
decision to unearth the jewels, he set out upon the trail of the thief.

Though the spoor was two days old, and practically obliterated in many
places, Tarzan followed it with comparative ease.  A white man could
not have followed it twenty paces twelve hours after it had been made,
a black man would have lost it within the first mile; but Tarzan of the
Apes had been forced in childhood to develop senses that an ordinary
mortal scarce ever uses.

We may note the garlic and whisky on the breath of a fellow strap
hanger, or the cheap perfume emanating from the person of the wondrous
lady sitting in front of us, and deplore the fact of our sensitive
noses; but, as a matter of fact, we cannot smell at all, our olfactory
organs are practically atrophied, by comparison with the development of
the sense among the beasts of the wild.

Where a foot is placed an effluvium remains for a considerable time.
It is beyond the range of our sensibilities; but to a creature of the
lower orders, especially to the hunters and the hunted, as interesting
and ofttimes more lucid than is the printed page to us.

Nor was Tarzan dependent alone upon his sense of smell.  Vision and
hearing had been brought to a marvelous state of development by the
necessities of his early life, where survival itself depended almost
daily upon the exercise of the keenest vigilance and the constant use
of all his faculties.

And so he followed the old trail of the Belgian through the forest and
toward the north; but because of the age of the trail he was
constrained to a far from rapid progress.  The man he followed was two
days ahead of him when Tarzan took up the pursuit, and each day he
gained upon the ape-man.  The latter, however, felt not the slightest
doubt as to the outcome.  Some day he would overhaul his quarry--he
could bide his time in peace until that day dawned.  Doggedly he
followed the faint spoor, pausing by day only to kill and eat, and at
night only to sleep and refresh himself.

Occasionally he passed parties of savage warriors; but these he gave a
wide berth, for he was hunting with a purpose that was not to be
distracted by the minor accidents of the trail.

These parties were of the collecting hordes of the Waziri and their
allies which Basuli had scattered his messengers broadcast to summon.
They were marching to a common rendezvous in preparation for an assault
upon the stronghold of Achmet Zek; but to Tarzan they were enemies--he
retained no conscious memory of any friendship for the black men.

It was night when he halted outside the palisaded village of the Arab
raider.  Perched in the branches of a great tree he gazed down upon the
life within the enclosure.  To this place had the spoor led him.  His
quarry must be within; but how was he to find him among so many huts?
Tarzan, although cognizant of his mighty powers, realized also his
limitations.  He knew that he could not successfully cope with great
numbers in open battle.  He must resort to the stealth and trickery of
the wild beast, if he were to succeed.

Sitting in the safety of his tree, munching upon the leg bone of Horta,
the boar, Tarzan waited a favorable opportunity to enter the village.
For awhile he gnawed at the bulging, round ends of the large bone,
splintering off small pieces between his strong jaws, and sucking at
the delicious marrow within; but all the time he cast repeated glances
into the village.  He saw white-robed figures, and half-naked blacks;
but not once did he see one who resembled the stealer of the gems.

Patiently he waited until the streets were deserted by all save the
sentries at the gates, then he dropped lightly to the ground, circled
to the opposite side of the village and approached the palisade.

At his side hung a long, rawhide rope--a natural and more dependable
evolution from the grass rope of his childhood. Loosening this, he
spread the noose upon the ground behind him, and with a quick movement
of his wrist tossed the coils over one of the sharpened projections of
the summit of the palisade.

Drawing the noose taut, he tested the solidity of its hold. Satisfied,
the ape-man ran nimbly up the vertical wall, aided by the rope which he
clutched in both hands.  Once at the top it required but a moment to
gather the dangling rope once more into its coils, make it fast again
at his waist, take a quick glance downward within the palisade, and,
assured that no one lurked directly beneath him, drop softly to the
ground.

Now he was within the village.  Before him stretched a series of tents
and native huts.  The business of exploring each of them would be
fraught with danger; but danger was only a natural factor of each day's
life--it never appalled Tarzan.  The chances appealed to him--the
chances of life and death, with his prowess and his faculties pitted
against those of a worthy antagonist.

It was not necessary that he enter each habitation--through a door, a
window or an open chink, his nose told him whether or not his prey lay
within.  For some time he found one disappointment following upon the
heels of another in quick succession.  No spoor of the Belgian was
discernible. But at last he came to a tent where the smell of the thief
was strong.  Tarzan listened, his ear close to the canvas at the rear,
but no sound came from within.

At last he cut one of the pin ropes, raised the bottom of the canvas,
and intruded his head within the interior.  All was quiet and dark.
Tarzan crawled cautiously within--the scent of the Belgian was strong;
but it was not live scent. Even before he had examined the interior
minutely, Tarzan knew that no one was within it.

In one corner he found a pile of blankets and clothing scattered about;
but no pouch of pretty pebbles.  A careful examination of the balance
of the tent revealed nothing more, at least nothing to indicate the
presence of the jewels; but at the side where the blankets and clothing
lay, the ape-man discovered that the tent wall had been loosened at the
bottom, and presently he sensed that the Belgian had recently passed
out of the tent by this avenue.

Tarzan was not long in following the way that his prey had fled.  The
spoor led always in the shadow and at the rear of the huts and tents of
the village--it was quite evident to Tarzan that the Belgian had gone
alone and secretly upon his mission.  Evidently he feared the
inhabitants of the village, or at least his work had been of such a
nature that he dared not risk detection.

At the back of a native hut the spoor led through a small hole recently
cut in the brush wall and into the dark interior beyond.  Fearlessly,
Tarzan followed the trail.  On hands and knees, he crawled through the
small aperture.  Within the hut his nostrils were assailed by many
odors; but clear and distinct among them was one that half aroused a
latent memory of the past--it was the faint and delicate odor of a
woman.  With the cognizance of it there rose in the breast of the
ape-man a strange uneasiness--the result of an irresistible force which
he was destined to become acquainted with anew--the instinct which
draws the male to his mate.

In the same hut was the scent spoor of the Belgian, too, and as both
these assailed the nostrils of the ape-man, mingling one with the
other, a jealous rage leaped and burned within him, though his memory
held before the mirror of recollection no image of the she to which he
had attached his desire.

Like the tent he had investigated, the hut, too, was empty, and after
satisfying himself that his stolen pouch was secreted nowhere within,
he left, as he had entered, by the hole in the rear wall.

Here he took up the spoor of the Belgian, followed it across the
clearing, over the palisade, and out into the dark jungle beyond.




15

The Flight of Werper


After Werper had arranged the dummy in his bed, and sneaked out into
the darkness of the village beneath the rear wall of his tent, he had
gone directly to the hut in which Jane Clayton was held captive.

Before the doorway squatted a black sentry.  Werper approached him
boldly, spoke a few words in his ear, handed him a package of tobacco,
and passed into the hut.  The black grinned and winked as the European
disappeared within the darkness of the interior.

The Belgian, being one of Achmet Zek's principal lieutenants, might
naturally go where he wished within or without the village, and so the
sentry had not questioned his right to enter the hut with the white,
woman prisoner.

Within, Werper called in French and in a low whisper: "Lady Greystoke!
It is I, M. Frecoult.  Where are you?" But there was no response.
Hastily the man felt around the interior, groping blindly through the
darkness with outstretched hands.  There was no one within!

Werper's astonishment surpassed words.  He was on the point of stepping
without to question the sentry, when his eyes, becoming accustomed to
the dark, discovered a blotch of lesser blackness near the base of the
rear wall of the hut. Examination revealed the fact that the blotch was
an opening cut in the wall.  It was large enough to permit the passage
of his body, and assured as he was that Lady Greystoke had passed out
through the aperture in an attempt to escape the village, he lost no
time in availing himself of the same avenue; but neither did he lose
time in a fruitless search for Jane Clayton.

His own life depended upon the chance of his eluding, or outdistancing
Achmet Zek, when that worthy should have discovered that he had
escaped.  His original plan had contemplated connivance in the escape
of Lady Greystoke for two very good and sufficient reasons.  The first
was that by saving her he would win the gratitude of the English, and
thus lessen the chance of his extradition should his identity and his
crime against his superior officer be charged against him.

The second reason was based upon the fact that only one direction of
escape was safely open to him.  He could not travel to the west because
of the Belgian possessions which lay between him and the Atlantic.  The
south was closed to him by the feared presence of the savage ape-man he
had robbed.  To the north lay the friends and allies of Achmet Zek.
Only toward the east, through British East Africa, lay reasonable
assurance of freedom.

Accompanied by a titled Englishwoman whom he had rescued from a
frightful fate, and his identity vouched for by her as that of a
Frenchman by the name of Frecoult, he had looked forward, and not
without reason, to the active assistance of the British from the moment
that he came in contact with their first outpost.

But now that Lady Greystoke had disappeared, though he still looked
toward the east for hope, his chances were lessened, and another,
subsidiary design completely dashed. From the moment that he had first
laid eyes upon Jane Clayton he had nursed within his breast a secret
passion for the beautiful American wife of the English lord, and when
Achmet Zek's discovery of the jewels had necessitated flight, the
Belgian had dreamed, in his planning, of a future in which he might
convince Lady Greystoke that her husband was dead, and by playing upon
her gratitude win her for himself.

At that part of the village farthest from the gates, Werper discovered
that two or three long poles, taken from a nearby pile which had been
collected for the construction of huts, had been leaned against the top
of the palisade, forming a precarious, though not impossible avenue of
escape.

Rightly, he inferred that thus had Lady Greystoke found the means to
scale the wall, nor did he lose even a moment in following her lead.
Once in the jungle he struck out directly eastward.

A few miles south of him, Jane Clayton lay panting among the branches
of a tree in which she had taken refuge from a prowling and hungry
lioness.

Her escape from the village had been much easier than she had
anticipated.  The knife which she had used to cut her way through the
brush wall of the hut to freedom she had found sticking in the wall of
her prison, doubtless left there by accident when a former tenant had
vacated the premises.

To cross the rear of the village, keeping always in the densest
shadows, had required but a few moments, and the fortunate circumstance
of the discovery of the hut poles lying so near the palisade had solved
for her the problem of the passage of the high wall.

For an hour she had followed the old game trail toward the south, until
there fell upon her trained hearing the stealthy padding of a stalking
beast behind her.  The nearest tree gave her instant sanctuary, for she
was too wise in the ways of the jungle to chance her safety for a
moment after discovering that she was being hunted.

Werper, with better success, traveled slowly onward until dawn, when,
to his chagrin, he discovered a mounted Arab upon his trail.  It was
one of Achmet Zek's minions, many of whom were scattered in all
directions through the forest, searching for the fugitive Belgian.

Jane Clayton's escape had not yet been discovered when Achmet Zek and
his searchers set forth to overhaul Werper. The only man who had seen
the Belgian after his departure from his tent was the black sentry
before the doorway of Lady Greystoke's prison hut, and he had been
silenced by the discovery of the dead body of the man who had relieved
him, the sentry that Mugambi had dispatched.

The bribe taker naturally inferred that Werper had slain his fellow and
dared not admit that he had permitted him to enter the hut, fearing as
he did, the anger of Achmet Zek. So, as chance directed that he should
be the one to discover the body of the sentry when the first alarm had
been given following Achmet Zek's discovery that Werper had outwitted
him, the crafty black had dragged the dead body to the interior of a
nearby tent, and himself resumed his station before the doorway of the
hut in which he still believed the woman to be.

With the discovery of the Arab close behind him, the Belgian hid in the
foliage of a leafy bush.  Here the trail ran straight for a
considerable distance, and down the shady forest aisle, beneath the
overarching branches of the trees, rode the white-robed figure of the
pursuer.

Nearer and nearer he came.  Werper crouched closer to the ground behind
the leaves of his hiding place.  Across the trail a vine moved.
Werper's eyes instantly centered upon the spot.  There was no wind to
stir the foliage in the depths of the jungle.  Again the vine moved.
In the mind of the Belgian only the presence of a sinister and
malevolent force could account for the phenomenon.

The man's eyes bored steadily into the screen of leaves upon the
opposite side of the trail.  Gradually a form took shape beyond them--a
tawny form, grim and terrible, with yellow-green eyes glaring
fearsomely across the narrow trail straight into his.

Werper could have screamed in fright, but up the trail was coming the
messenger of another death, equally sure and no less terrible.  He
remained silent, almost paralyzed by fear. The Arab approached.  Across
the trail from Werper the lion crouched for the spring, when suddenly
his attention was attracted toward the horseman.

The Belgian saw the massive head turn in the direction of the raider
and his heart all but ceased its beating as he awaited the result of
this interruption.  At a walk the horseman approached.  Would the
nervous animal he rode take fright at the odor of the carnivore, and,
bolting, leave Werper still to the mercies of the king of beasts?

But he seemed unmindful of the near presence of the great cat.  On he
came, his neck arched, champing at the bit between his teeth.  The
Belgian turned his eyes again toward the lion.  The beast's whole
attention now seemed riveted upon the horseman.  They were abreast the
lion now, and still the brute did not spring.  Could he be but waiting
for them to pass before returning his attention to the original prey?
Werper shuddered and half rose.  At the same instant the lion sprang
from his place of concealment, full upon the mounted man.  The horse,
with a shrill neigh of terror, shrank sideways almost upon the Belgian,
the lion dragged the helpless Arab from his saddle, and the horse
leaped back into the trail and fled away toward the west.

But he did not flee alone.  As the frightened beast had pressed in upon
him, Werper had not been slow to note the quickly emptied saddle and
the opportunity it presented. Scarcely had the lion dragged the Arab
down from one side, than the Belgian, seizing the pommel of the saddle
and the horse's mane, leaped upon the horse's back from the other.

A half hour later a naked giant, swinging easily through the lower
branches of the trees, paused, and with raised head, and dilating
nostrils sniffed the morning air.  The smell of blood fell strong upon
his senses, and mingled with it was the scent of Numa, the lion.  The
giant cocked his head upon one side and listened.

From a short distance up the trail came the unmistakable noises of the
greedy feeding of a lion.  The crunching of bones, the gulping of great
pieces, the contented growling, all attested the nearness of the king
at table.

Tarzan approached the spot, still keeping to the branches of the trees.
He made no effort to conceal his approach, and presently he had
evidence that Numa had heard him, from the ominous, rumbling warning
that broke from a thicket beside the trail.

Halting upon a low branch just above the lion Tarzan looked down upon
the grisly scene.  Could this unrecognizable thing be the man he had
been trailing?  The ape-man wondered.  From time to time he had
descended to the trail and verified his judgment by the evidence of his
scent that the Belgian had followed this game trail toward the east.

Now he proceeded beyond the lion and his feast, again descended and
examined the ground with his nose.  There was no scent spoor here of
the man he had been trailing. Tarzan returned to the tree.  With keen
eyes he searched the ground about the mutilated corpse for a sign of
the missing pouch of pretty pebbles; but naught could he see of it.

He scolded Numa and tried to drive the great beast away; but only angry
growls rewarded his efforts.  He tore small branches from a nearby limb
and hurled them at his ancient enemy.  Numa looked up with bared fangs,
grinning hideously, but he did not rise from his kill.

Then Tarzan fitted an arrow to his bow, and drawing the slim shaft far
back let drive with all the force of the tough wood that only he could
bend.  As the arrow sank deeply into his side, Numa leaped to his feet
with a roar of mingled rage and pain.  He leaped futilely at the
grinning ape-man, tore at the protruding end of the shaft, and then,
springing into the trail, paced back and forth beneath his tormentor.
Again Tarzan loosed a swift bolt.  This time the missile, aimed with
care, lodged in the lion's spine.  The great creature halted in its
tracks, and lurched awkwardly forward upon its face, paralyzed.

Tarzan dropped to the trail, ran quickly to the beast's side, and drove
his spear deep into the fierce heart, then after recovering his arrows
turned his attention to the mutilated remains of the animal's prey in
the nearby thicket.

The face was gone.  The Arab garments aroused no doubt as to the man's
identity, since he had trailed him into the Arab camp and out again,
where he might easily have acquired the apparel.  So sure was Tarzan
that the body was that of he who had robbed him that he made no effort
to verify his deductions by scent among the conglomerate odors of the
great carnivore and the fresh blood of the victim.

He confined his attentions to a careful search for the pouch, but
nowhere upon or about the corpse was any sign of the missing article or
its contents.  The ape-man was disappointed--possibly not so much
because of the loss of the colored pebbles as with Numa for robbing him
of the pleasures of revenge.

Wondering what could have become of his possessions, the ape-man turned
slowly back along the trail in the direction from which he had come.
In his mind he revolved a plan to enter and search the Arab camp, after
darkness had again fallen.  Taking to the trees, he moved directly
south in search of prey, that he might satisfy his hunger before
midday, and then lie up for the afternoon in some spot far from the
camp, where he might sleep without fear of discovery until it came time
to prosecute his design.

Scarcely had he quitted the trail when a tall, black warrior, moving at
a dogged trot, passed toward the east.  It was Mugambi, searching for
his mistress.  He continued along the trail, halting to examine the
body of the dead lion.  An expression of puzzlement crossed his
features as he bent to search for the wounds which had caused the death
of the jungle lord.  Tarzan had removed his arrows, but to Mugambi the
proof of death was as strong as though both the lighter missiles and
the spear still protruded from the carcass.

The black looked furtively about him.  The body was still warm, and
from this fact he reasoned that the killer was close at hand, yet no
sign of living man appeared.  Mugambi shook his head, and continued
along the trail, but with redoubled caution.

All day he traveled, stopping occasionally to call aloud the single
word, "Lady," in the hope that at last she might hear and respond; but
in the end his loyal devotion brought him to disaster.

From the northeast, for several months, Abdul Mourak, in command of a
detachment of Abyssinian soldiers, had been assiduously searching for
the Arab raider, Achmet Zek, who, six months previously, had affronted
the majesty of Abdul Mourak's emperor by conducting a slave raid within
the boundaries of Menelek's domain.

And now it happened that Abdul Mourak had halted for a short rest at
noon upon this very day and along the same trail that Werper and
Mugambi were following toward the east.

It was shortly after the soldiers had dismounted that the Belgian,
unaware of their presence, rode his tired mount almost into their
midst, before he had discovered them.  Instantly he was surrounded, and
a volley of questions hurled at him, as he was pulled from his horse
and led toward the presence of the commander.

Falling back upon his European nationality, Werper assured Abdul Mourak
that he was a Frenchman, hunting in Africa, and that he had been
attacked by strangers, his safari killed or scattered, and himself
escaping only by a miracle.

From a chance remark of the Abyssinian, Werper discovered the purpose
of the expedition, and when he realized that these men were the enemies
of Achmet Zek, he took heart, and immediately blamed his predicament
upon the Arab.

Lest, however, he might again fall into the hands of the raider, he
discouraged Abdul Mourak in the further prosecution of his pursuit,
assuring the Abyssinian that Achmet Zek commanded a large and dangerous
force, and also that he was marching rapidly toward the south.

Convinced that it would take a long time to overhaul the raider, and
that the chances of engagement made the outcome extremely questionable,
Mourak, none too unwillingly, abandoned his plan and gave the necessary
orders for his command to pitch camp where they were, preparatory to
taking up the return march toward Abyssinia the following morning.

It was late in the afternoon that the attention of the camp was
attracted toward the west by the sound of a powerful voice calling a
single word, repeated several times: "Lady!  Lady!  Lady!"

True to their instincts of precaution, a number of Abyssinians, acting
under orders from Abdul Mourak, advanced stealthily through the jungle
toward the author of the call.

A half hour later they returned, dragging Mugambi among them.  The
first person the big black's eyes fell upon as he was hustled into the
presence of the Abyssinian officer, was M. Jules Frecoult, the
Frenchman who had been the guest of his master and whom he last had
seen entering the village of Achmet Zek under circumstances which
pointed to his familiarity and friendship for the raiders.

Between the disasters that had befallen his master and his master's
house, and the Frenchman, Mugambi saw a sinister relationship, which
kept him from recalling to Werper's attention the identity which the
latter evidently failed to recognize.

Pleading that he was but a harmless hunter from a tribe farther south,
Mugambi begged to be allowed to go upon his way; but Abdul Mourak,
admiring the warrior's splendid physique, decided to take him back to
Adis Abeba and present him to Menelek.  A few moments later Mugambi and
Werper were marched away under guard, and the Belgian learned for the
first time, that he too was a prisoner rather than a guest.  In vain he
protested against such treatment, until a strapping soldier struck him
across the mouth and threatened to shoot him if he did not desist.

Mugambi took the matter less to heart, for he had not the slightest
doubt but that during the course of the journey he would find ample
opportunity to elude the vigilance of his guards and make good his
escape.  With this idea always uppermost in his mind, he courted the
good opinion of the Abyssinians, asked them many questions about their
emperor and their country, and evinced a growing desire to reach their
destination, that he might enjoy all the good things which they assured
him the city of Adis Abeba contained.  Thus he disarmed their
suspicions, and each day found a slight relaxation of their
watchfulness over him.

By taking advantage of the fact that he and Werper always were kept
together, Mugambi sought to learn what the other knew of the
whereabouts of Tarzan, or the authorship of the raid upon the bungalow,
as well as the fate of Lady Greystoke; but as he was confined to the
accidents of conversation for this information, not daring to acquaint
Werper with his true identity, and as Werper was equally anxious to
conceal from the world his part in the destruction of his host's home
and happiness, Mugambi learned nothing--at least in this way.

But there came a time when he learned a very surprising thing, by
accident.

The party had camped early in the afternoon of a sultry day, upon the
banks of a clear and beautiful stream.  The bottom of the river was
gravelly, there was no indication of crocodiles, those menaces to
promiscuous bathing in the rivers of certain portions of the dark
continent, and so the Abyssinians took advantage of the opportunity to
perform long-deferred, and much needed, ablutions.

As Werper, who, with Mugambi, had been given permission to enter the
water, removed his clothing, the black noted the care with which he
unfastened something which circled his waist, and which he took off
with his shirt, keeping the latter always around and concealing the
object of his suspicious solicitude.

It was this very carefulness which attracted the black's attention to
the thing, arousing a natural curiosity in the warrior's mind, and so
it chanced that when the Belgian, in the nervousness of overcaution,
fumbled the hidden article and dropped it, Mugambi saw it as it fell
upon the ground, spilling a portion of its contents on the sward.

Now Mugambi had been to London with his master.  He was not the
unsophisticated savage that his apparel proclaimed him.  He had mingled
with the cosmopolitan hordes of the greatest city in the world; he had
visited museums and inspected shop windows; and, besides, he was a
shrewd and intelligent man.

The instant that the jewels of Opar rolled, scintillating, before his
astonished eyes, he recognized them for what they were; but he
recognized something else, too, that interested him far more deeply
than the value of the stones. A thousand times he had seen the leathern
pouch which dangled at his master's side, when Tarzan of the Apes had,
in a spirit of play and adventure, elected to return for a few hours to
the primitive manners and customs of his boyhood, and surrounded by his
naked warriors hunt the lion and the leopard, the buffalo and the
elephant after the manner he loved best.

Werper saw that Mugambi had seen the pouch and the stones.  Hastily he
gathered up the precious gems and returned them to their container,
while Mugambi, assuming an air of indifference, strolled down to the
river for his bath.

The following morning Abdul Mourak was enraged and chagrined to
discover that his huge, black prisoner had escaped during the night,
while Werper was terrified for the same reason, until his trembling
fingers discovered the pouch still in its place beneath his shirt, and
within it the hard outlines of its contents.




16

Tarzan Again Leads the Mangani


Achmet Zek with two of his followers had circled far to the south to
intercept the flight of his deserting lieutenant, Werper.  Others had
spread out in various directions, so that a vast circle had been formed
by them during the night, and now they were beating in toward the
center.

Achmet and the two with him halted for a short rest just before noon.
They squatted beneath the trees upon the southern edge of a clearing.
The chief of the raiders was in ill humor.  To have been outwitted by
an unbeliever was bad enough; but to have, at the same time, lost the
jewels upon which he had set his avaricious heart was altogether too
much--Allah must, indeed be angry with his servant.

Well, he still had the woman.  She would bring a fair price in the
north, and there was, too, the buried treasure beside the ruins of the
Englishman's house.

A slight noise in the jungle upon the opposite side of the clearing
brought Achmet Zek to immediate and alert attention.  He gathered his
rifle in readiness for instant use, at the same time motioning his
followers to silence and concealment.  Crouching behind the bushes the
three waited, their eyes fastened upon the far side of the open space.

Presently the foliage parted and a woman's face appeared, glancing
fearfully from side to side.  A moment later, evidently satisfied that
no immediate danger lurked before her, she stepped out into the
clearing in full view of the Arab.

Achmet Zek caught his breath with a muttered exclamation of incredulity
and an imprecation.  The woman was the prisoner he had thought safely
guarded at his camp!

Apparently she was alone, but Achmet Zek waited that he might make sure
of it before seizing her.  Slowly Jane Clayton started across the
clearing.  Twice already since she had quitted the village of the
raiders had she barely escaped the fangs of carnivora, and once she had
almost stumbled into the path of one of the searchers.  Though she was
almost despairing of ever reaching safety she still was determined to
fight on, until death or success terminated her endeavors.

As the Arabs watched her from the safety of their concealment, and
Achmet Zek noted with satisfaction that she was walking directly into
his clutches, another pair of eyes looked down upon the entire scene
from the foliage of an adjacent tree.

Puzzled, troubled eyes they were, for all their gray and savage glint,
for their owner was struggling with an intangible suggestion of the
familiarity of the face and figure of the woman below him.

A sudden crashing of the bushes at the point from which Jane Clayton
had emerged into the clearing brought her to a sudden stop and
attracted the attention of the Arabs and the watcher in the tree to the
same point.

The woman wheeled about to see what new danger menaced her from behind,
and as she did so a great, anthropoid ape waddled into view.  Behind
him came another and another; but Lady Greystoke did not wait to learn
how many more of the hideous creatures were so close upon her trail.

With a smothered scream she rushed toward the opposite jungle, and as
she reached the bushes there, Achmet Zek and his two henchmen rose up
and seized her.  At the same instant a naked, brown giant dropped from
the branches of a tree at the right of the clearing.

Turning toward the astonished apes he gave voice to a short volley of
low gutturals, and without waiting to note the effect of his words upon
them, wheeled and charged for the Arabs.

Achmet Zek was dragging Jane Clayton toward his tethered horse.  His
two men were hastily unfastening all three mounts.  The woman,
struggling to escape the Arab, turned and saw the ape-man running
toward her.  A glad light of hope illuminated her face.

"John!" she cried.  "Thank God that you have come in time."

Behind Tarzan came the great apes, wondering, but obedient to his
summons.  The Arabs saw that they would not have time to mount and make
their escape before the beasts and the man were upon them.  Achmet Zek
recognized the latter as the redoubtable enemy of such as he, and he
saw, too, in the circumstance an opportunity to rid himself forever of
the menace of the ape-man's presence.

Calling to his men to follow his example he raised his rifle and
leveled it upon the charging giant.  His followers, acting with no less
alacrity than himself, fired almost simultaneously, and with the
reports of the rifles, Tarzan of the Apes and two of his hairy henchmen
pitched forward among the jungle grasses.

The noise of the rifle shots brought the balance of the apes to a
wondering pause, and, taking advantage of their momentary distraction,
Achmet Zek and his fellows leaped to their horses' backs and galloped
away with the now hopeless and grief-stricken woman.

Back to the village they rode, and once again Lady Greystoke found
herself incarcerated in the filthy, little hut from which she had
thought to have escaped for good.  But this time she was not only
guarded by an additional sentry, but bound as well.

Singly and in twos the searchers who had ridden out with Achmet Zek
upon the trail of the Belgian, returned empty handed.  With the report
of each the raider's rage and chagrin increased, until he was in such a
transport of ferocious anger that none dared approach him.  Threatening
and cursing, Achmet Zek paced up and down the floor of his silken tent;
but his temper served him naught--Werper was gone and with him the
fortune in scintillating gems which had aroused the cupidity of his
chief and placed the sentence of death upon the head of the lieutenant.

With the escape of the Arabs the great apes had turned their attention
to their fallen comrades.  One was dead, but another and the great
white ape still breathed.  The hairy monsters gathered about these two,
grumbling and muttering after the fashion of their kind.

Tarzan was the first to regain consciousness.  Sitting up, he looked
about him.  Blood was flowing from a wound in his shoulder.  The shock
had thrown him down and dazed him; but he was far from dead.  Rising
slowly to his feet he let his eyes wander toward the spot where last he
had seen the she, who had aroused within his savage breast such strange
emotions.

"Where is she?" he asked.

"The Tarmangani took her away," replied one of the apes.  "Who are you
who speak the language of the Mangani?"

"I am Tarzan," replied the ape-man; "mighty hunter, greatest of
fighters.  When I roar, the jungle is silent and trembles with terror.
I am Tarzan of the Apes.  I have been away; but now I have come back to
my people."

"Yes," spoke up an old ape, "he is Tarzan.  I know him.  It is well
that he has come back.  Now we shall have good hunting."

The other apes came closer and sniffed at the ape-man.  Tarzan stood
very still, his fangs half bared, and his muscles tense and ready for
action; but there was none there to question his right to be with them,
and presently, the inspection satisfactorily concluded, the apes again
returned their attention to the other survivor.

He too was but slightly wounded, a bullet, grazing his skull, having
stunned him, so that when he regained consciousness he was apparently
as fit as ever.

The apes told Tarzan that they had been traveling toward the east when
the scent spoor of the she had attracted them and they had stalked her.
Now they wished to continue upon their interrupted march; but Tarzan
preferred to follow the Arabs and take the woman from them.  After a
considerable argument it was decided that they should first hunt toward
the east for a few days and then return and search for the Arabs, and
as time is of little moment to the ape folk, Tarzan acceded to their
demands, he, himself, having reverted to a mental state but little
superior to their own.

Another circumstance which decided him to postpone pursuit of the Arabs
was the painfulness of his wound.  It would be better to wait until
that had healed before he pitted himself again against the guns of the
Tarmangani.

And so, as Jane Clayton was pushed into her prison hut and her hands
and feet securely bound, her natural protector roamed off toward the
east in company with a score of hairy monsters, with whom he rubbed
shoulders as familiarly as a few months before he had mingled with his
immaculate fellow-members of one of London's most select and exclusive
clubs.

But all the time there lurked in the back of his injured brain a
troublesome conviction that he had no business where he was--that he
should be, for some unaccountable reason, elsewhere and among another
sort of creature.  Also, there was the compelling urge to be upon the
scent of the Arabs, undertaking the rescue of the woman who had
appealed so strongly to his savage sentiments; though the thought-word
which naturally occurred to him in the contemplation of the venture,
was "capture," rather than "rescue."

To him she was as any other jungle she, and he had set his heart upon
her as his mate.  For an instant, as he had approached closer to her in
the clearing where the Arabs had seized her, the subtle aroma which had
first aroused his desires in the hut that had imprisoned her had fallen
upon his nostrils, and told him that he had found the creature for whom
he had developed so sudden and inexplicable a passion.

The matter of the pouch of jewels also occupied his thoughts to some
extent, so that he found a double urge for his return to the camp of
the raiders.  He would obtain possession of both his pretty pebbles and
the she.  Then he would return to the great apes with his new mate and
his baubles, and leading his hairy companions into a far wilderness
beyond the ken of man, live out his life, hunting and battling among
the lower orders after the only manner which he now recollected.

He spoke to his fellow-apes upon the matter, in an attempt to persuade
them to accompany him; but all except Taglat and Chulk refused.  The
latter was young and strong, endowed with a greater intelligence than
his fellows, and therefore the possessor of better developed powers of
imagination.  To him the expedition savored of adventure, and so
appealed, strongly.  With Taglat there was another incentive--a secret
and sinister incentive, which, had Tarzan of the Apes had knowledge of
it, would have sent him at the other's throat in jealous rage.

Taglat was no longer young; but he was still a formidable beast,
mightily muscled, cruel, and, because of his greater experience, crafty
and cunning.  Too, he was of giant proportions, the very weight of his
huge bulk serving ofttimes to discount in his favor the superior
agility of a younger antagonist.

He was of a morose and sullen disposition that marked him even among
his frowning fellows, where such characteristics are the rule rather
than the exception, and, though Tarzan did not guess it, he hated the
ape-man with a ferocity that he was able to hide only because the
dominant spirit of the nobler creature had inspired within him a
species of dread which was as powerful as it was inexplicable to him.

These two, then, were to be Tarzan's companions upon his return to the
village of Achmet Zek.  As they set off, the balance of the tribe
vouchsafed them but a parting stare, and then resumed the serious
business of feeding.

Tarzan found difficulty in keeping the minds of his fellows set upon
the purpose of their adventure, for the mind of an ape lacks the power
of long-sustained concentration.  To set out upon a long journey, with
a definite destination in view, is one thing, to remember that purpose
and keep it uppermost in one's mind continually is quite another.
There are so many things to distract one's attention along the way.

Chulk was, at first, for rushing rapidly ahead as though the village of
the raiders lay but an hour's march before them instead of several
days; but within a few minutes a fallen tree attracted his attention
with its suggestion of rich and succulent forage beneath, and when
Tarzan, missing him, returned in search, he found Chulk squatting
beside the rotting bole, from beneath which he was assiduously engaged
in digging out the grubs and beetles, whose kind form a considerable
proportion of the diet of the apes.

Unless Tarzan desired to fight there was nothing to do but wait until
Chulk had exhausted the storehouse, and this he did, only to discover
that Taglat was now missing.  After a considerable search, he found
that worthy gentleman contemplating the sufferings of an injured rodent
he had pounced upon.  He would sit in apparent indifference, gazing in
another direction, while the crippled creature wriggled slowly and
painfully away from him, and then, just as his victim felt assured of
escape, he would reach out a giant palm and slam it down upon the
fugitive.  Again and again he repeated this operation, until, tiring of
the sport, he ended the sufferings of his plaything by devouring it.

Such were the exasperating causes of delay which retarded Tarzan's
return journey toward the village of Achmet Zek; but the ape-man was
patient, for in his mind was a plan which necessitated the presence of
Chulk and Taglat when he should have arrived at his destination.

It was not always an easy thing to maintain in the vacillating minds of
the anthropoids a sustained interest in their venture.  Chulk was
wearying of the continued marching and the infrequency and short
duration of the rests.  He would gladly have abandoned this search for
adventure had not Tarzan continually filled his mind with alluring
pictures of the great stores of food which were to be found in the
village of Tarmangani.

Taglat nursed his secret purpose to better advantage than might have
been expected of an ape, yet there were times when he, too, would have
abandoned the adventure had not Tarzan cajoled him on.

It was mid-afternoon of a sultry, tropical day when the keen senses of
the three warned them of the proximity of the Arab camp.  Stealthily
they approached, keeping to the dense tangle of growing things which
made concealment easy to their uncanny jungle craft.

First came the giant ape-man, his smooth, brown skin glistening with
the sweat of exertion in the close, hot confines of the jungle.  Behind
him crept Chulk and Taglat, grotesque and shaggy caricatures of their
godlike leader.

Silently they made their way to the edge of the clearing which
surrounded the palisade, and here they clambered into the lower
branches of a large tree overlooking the village occupied by the enemy,
the better to spy upon his goings and comings.

A horseman, white burnoosed, rode out through the gateway of the
village.  Tarzan, whispering to Chulk and Taglat to remain where they
were, swung, monkey-like, through the trees in the direction of the
trail the Arab was riding.  From one jungle giant to the next he sped
with the rapidity of a squirrel and the silence of a ghost.

The Arab rode slowly onward, unconscious of the danger hovering in the
trees behind him.  The ape-man made a slight detour and increased his
speed until he had reached a point upon the trail in advance of the
horseman.  Here he halted upon a leafy bough which overhung the narrow,
jungle trail. On came the victim, humming a wild air of the great
desert land of the north.  Above him poised the savage brute that was
today bent upon the destruction of a human life--the same creature who
a few months before, had occupied his seat in the House of Lords at
London, a respected and distinguished member of that august body.

The Arab passed beneath the overhanging bough, there was a slight
rustling of the leaves above, the horse snorted and plunged as a
brown-skinned creature dropped upon its rump.  A pair of mighty arms
encircled the Arab and he was dragged from his saddle to the trail.

Ten minutes later the ape-man, carrying the outer garments of an Arab
bundled beneath an arm, rejoined his companions.  He exhibited his
trophies to them, explaining in low gutturals the details of his
exploit.  Chulk and Taglat fingered the fabrics, smelled of them, and,
placing them to their ears, tried to listen to them.

Then Tarzan led them back through the jungle to the trail, where the
three hid themselves and waited.  Nor had they long to wait before two
of Achmet Zek's blacks, clothed in habiliments similar to their
master's, came down the trail on foot, returning to the camp.

One moment they were laughing and talking together--the next they lay
stretched in death upon the trail, three mighty engines of destruction
bending over them.  Tarzan removed their outer garments as he had
removed those of his first victim, and again retired with Chulk and
Taglat to the greater seclusion of the tree they had first selected.

Here the ape-man arranged the garments upon his shaggy fellows and
himself, until, at a distance, it might have appeared that three
white-robed Arabs squatted silently among the branches of the forest.

Until dark they remained where they were, for from his point of
vantage, Tarzan could view the enclosure within the palisade.  He
marked the position of the hut in which he had first discovered the
scent spoor of the she he sought.  He saw the two sentries standing
before its doorway, and he located the habitation of Achmet Zek, where
something told him he would most likely find the missing pouch and
pebbles.

Chulk and Taglat were, at first, greatly interested in their wonderful
raiment.  They fingered the fabric, smelled of it, and regarded each
other intently with every mark of satisfaction and pride.  Chulk, a
humorist in his way, stretched forth a long and hairy arm, and grasping
the hood of Taglat's burnoose pulled it down over the latter's eyes,
extinguishing him, snuffer-like, as it were.

The older ape, pessimistic by nature, recognized no such thing as
humor.  Creatures laid their paws upon him for but two things--to
search for fleas and to attack.  The pulling of the Tarmangani-scented
thing about his head and eyes could not be for the performance of the
former act; therefore it must be the latter.  He was attacked!  Chulk
had attacked him.

With a snarl he was at the other's throat, not even waiting to lift the
woolen veil which obscured his vision.  Tarzan leaped upon the two, and
swaying and toppling upon their insecure perch the three great beasts
tussled and snapped at one another until the ape-man finally succeeded
in separating the enraged anthropoids.

As apology is unknown to these savage progenitors of man, and
explanation a laborious and usually futile process, Tarzan bridged the
dangerous gulf by distracting their attention from their altercation to
a consideration of their plans for the immediate future.  Accustomed to
frequent arguments in which more hair than blood is wasted, the apes
speedily forget such trivial encounters, and presently Chulk and Taglat
were again squatting in close proximity to each other and peaceful
repose, awaiting the moment when the ape-man should lead them into the
village of the Tarmangani.

It was long after darkness had fallen, that Tarzan led his companions
from their hiding place in the tree to the ground and around the
palisade to the far side of the village.

Gathering the skirts of his burnoose, beneath one arm, that his legs
might have free action, the ape-man took a short running start, and
scrambled to the top of the barrier.  Fearing lest the apes should rend
their garments to shreds in a similar attempt, he had directed them to
wait below for him, and himself securely perched upon the summit of the
palisade he unslung his spear and lowered one end of it to Chulk.

The ape seized it, and while Tarzan held tightly to the upper end, the
anthropoid climbed quickly up the shaft until with one paw he grasped
the top of the wall.  To scramble then to Tarzan's side was the work of
but an instant.  In like manner Taglat was conducted to their sides,
and a moment later the three dropped silently within the enclosure.

Tarzan led them first to the rear of the hut in which Jane Clayton was
confined, where, through the roughly repaired aperture in the wall, he
sought with his sensitive nostrils for proof that the she he had come
for was within.

Chulk and Taglat, their hairy faces pressed close to that of the
patrician, sniffed with him.  Each caught the scent spoor of the woman
within, and each reacted according to his temperament and his habits of
thought.

It left Chulk indifferent.  The she was for Tarzan--all that he desired
was to bury his snout in the foodstuffs of the Tarmangani.  He had come
to eat his fill without labor--Tarzan had told him that that should be
his reward, and he was satisfied.

But Taglat's wicked, bloodshot eyes, narrowed to the realization of the
nearing fulfillment of his carefully nursed plan.  It is true that
sometimes during the several days that had elapsed since they had set
out upon their expedition it had been difficult for Taglat to hold his
idea uppermost in his mind, and on several occasions he had completely
forgotten it, until Tarzan, by a chance word, had recalled it to him,
but, for an ape, Taglat had done well.

Now, he licked his chops, and he made a sickening, sucking noise with
his flabby lips as he drew in his breath.

Satisfied that the she was where he had hoped to find her, Tarzan led
his apes toward the tent of Achmet Zek.  A passing Arab and two slaves
saw them, but the night was dark and the white burnooses hid the hairy
limbs of the apes and the giant figure of their leader, so that the
three, by squatting down as though in conversation, were passed by,
unsuspected.  To the rear of the tent they made their way.  Within,
Achmet Zek conversed with several of his lieutenants.  Without, Tarzan
listened.




17

The Deadly Peril of Jane Clayton


Lieutenant Albert Werper, terrified by contemplation of the fate which
might await him at Adis Abeba, cast about for some scheme of escape,
but after the black Mugambi had eluded their vigilance the Abyssinians
redoubled their precautions to prevent Werper following the lead of the
Negro.

For some time Werper entertained the idea of bribing Abdul Mourak with
a portion of the contents of the pouch; but fearing that the man would
demand all the gems as the price of liberty, the Belgian, influenced by
avarice, sought another avenue from his dilemma.

It was then that there dawned upon him the possibility of the success
of a different course which would still leave him in possession of the
jewels, while at the same time satisfying the greed of the Abyssinian
with the conviction that he had obtained all that Werper had to offer.

And so it was that a day or so after Mugambi had disappeared, Werper
asked for an audience with Abdul Mourak.  As the Belgian entered the
presence of his captor the scowl upon the features of the latter boded
ill for any hope which Werper might entertain, still he fortified
himself by recalling the common weakness of mankind, which permits the
most inflexible of natures to bend to the consuming desire for wealth.

Abdul Mourak eyed him, frowningly.  "What do you want now?" he asked.

"My liberty," replied Werper.

The Abyssinian sneered.  "And you disturbed me thus to tell me what any
fool might know," he said.

"I can pay for it," said Werper.

Abdul Mourak laughed loudly.  "Pay for it?" he cried.  "What with--the
rags that you have upon your back?  Or, perhaps you are concealing
beneath your coat a thousand pounds of ivory.  Get out!  You are a
fool.  Do not bother me again or I shall have you whipped."

But Werper persisted.  His liberty and perhaps his life depended upon
his success.

"Listen to me," he pleaded.  "If I can give you as much gold as ten men
may carry will you promise that I shall be conducted in safety to the
nearest English commissioner?"

"As much gold as ten men may carry!" repeated Abdul Mourak.  "You are
crazy.  Where have you so much gold as that?"

"I know where it is hid," said Werper.  "Promise, and I will lead you
to it--if ten loads is enough?"

Abdul Mourak had ceased to laugh.  He was eyeing the Belgian intently.
The fellow seemed sane enough--yet ten loads of gold!  It was
preposterous.  The Abyssinian thought in silence for a moment.

"Well, and if I promise," he said.  "How far is this gold?"

"A long week's march to the south," replied Werper.

"And if we do not find it where you say it is, do you realize what your
punishment will be?"

"If it is not there I will forfeit my life," replied the Belgian.  "I
know it is there, for I saw it buried with my own eyes.  And
more--there are not only ten loads, but as many as fifty men may carry.
It is all yours if you will promise to see me safely delivered into the
protection of the English."

"You will stake your life against the finding of the gold?" asked Abdul.

Werper assented with a nod.

"Very well," said the Abyssinian, "I promise, and even if there be but
five loads you shall have your freedom; but until the gold is in my
possession you remain a prisoner."

"I am satisfied," said Werper.  "Tomorrow we start?"

Abdul Mourak nodded, and the Belgian returned to his guards.  The
following day the Abyssinian soldiers were surprised to receive an
order which turned their faces from the northeast to the south.  And so
it happened that upon the very night that Tarzan and the two apes
entered the village of the raiders, the Abyssinians camped but a few
miles to the east of the same spot.

While Werper dreamed of freedom and the unmolested enjoyment of the
fortune in his stolen pouch, and Abdul Mourak lay awake in greedy
contemplation of the fifty loads of gold which lay but a few days
farther to the south of him, Achmet Zek gave orders to his lieutenants
that they should prepare a force of fighting men and carriers to
proceed to the ruins of the Englishman's DOUAR on the morrow and bring
back the fabulous fortune which his renegade lieutenant had told him
was buried there.

And as he delivered his instructions to those within, a silent listener
crouched without his tent, waiting for the time when he might enter in
safety and prosecute his search for the missing pouch and the pretty
pebbles that had caught his fancy.

At last the swarthy companions of Achmet Zek quitted his tent, and the
leader went with them to smoke a pipe with one of their number, leaving
his own silken habitation unguarded.  Scarcely had they left the
interior when a knife blade was thrust through the fabric of the rear
wall, some six feet above the ground, and a swift downward stroke
opened an entrance to those who waited beyond.

Through the opening stepped the ape-man, and close behind him came the
huge Chulk; but Taglat did not follow them.  Instead he turned and
slunk through the darkness toward the hut where the she who had
arrested his brutish interest lay securely bound.  Before the doorway
the sentries sat upon their haunches, conversing in monotones.  Within,
the young woman lay upon a filthy sleeping mat, resigned, through utter
hopelessness to whatever fate lay in store for her until the
opportunity arrived which would permit her to free herself by the only
means which now seemed even remotely possible--the hitherto detested
act of self-destruction.

Creeping silently toward the sentries, a white-burnoosed figure
approached the shadows at one end of the hut.  The meager intellect of
the creature denied it the advantage it might have taken of its
disguise.  Where it could have walked boldly to the very sides of the
sentries, it chose rather to sneak upon them, unseen, from the rear.

It came to the corner of the hut and peered around.  The sentries were
but a few paces away; but the ape did not dare expose himself, even for
an instant, to those feared and hated thunder-sticks which the
Tarmangani knew so well how to use, if there were another and safer
method of attack.

Taglat wished that there was a tree nearby from the over-hanging
branches of which he might spring upon his unsuspecting prey; but,
though there was no tree, the idea gave birth to a plan.  The eaves of
the hut were just above the heads of the sentries--from them he could
leap upon the Tarmangani, unseen.  A quick snap of those mighty jaws
would dispose of one of them before the other realized that they were
attacked, and the second would fall an easy prey to the strength,
agility and ferocity of a second quick charge.

Taglat withdrew a few paces to the rear of the hut, gathered himself
for the effort, ran quickly forward and leaped high into the air.  He
struck the roof directly above the rear wall of the hut, and the
structure, reinforced by the wall beneath, held his enormous weight for
an instant, then he moved forward a step, the roof sagged, the
thatching parted and the great anthropoid shot through into the
interior.

The sentries, hearing the crashing of the roof poles, leaped to their
feet and rushed into the hut.  Jane Clayton tried to roll aside as the
great form lit upon the floor so close to her that one foot pinned her
clothing to the ground.

The ape, feeling the movement beside him, reached down and gathered the
girl in the hollow of one mighty arm.  The burnoose covered the hairy
body so that Jane Clayton believed that a human arm supported her, and
from the extremity of hopelessness a great hope sprang into her breast
that at last she was in the keeping of a rescuer.

The two sentries were now within the hut, but hesitating because of
doubt as to the nature of the cause of the disturbance.  Their eyes,
not yet accustomed to the darkness of the interior, told them nothing,
nor did they hear any sound, for the ape stood silently awaiting their
attack.

Seeing that they stood without advancing, and realizing that,
handicapped as he was by the weight of the she, he could put up but a
poor battle, Taglat elected to risk a sudden break for liberty.
Lowering his head, he charged straight for the two sentries who blocked
the doorway.  The impact of his mighty shoulders bowled them over upon
their backs, and before they could scramble to their feet, the ape was
gone, darting in the shadows of the huts toward the palisade at the far
end of the village.

The speed and strength of her rescuer filled Jane Clayton with wonder.
Could it be that Tarzan had survived the bullet of the Arab?  Who else
in all the jungle could bear the weight of a grown woman as lightly as
he who held her?  She spoke his name; but there was no response.  Still
she did not give up hope.

At the palisade the beast did not even hesitate.  A single mighty leap
carried it to the top, where it poised but for an instant before
dropping to the ground upon the opposite side.  Now the girl was almost
positive that she was safe in the arms of her husband, and when the ape
took to the trees and bore her swiftly into the jungle, as Tarzan had
done at other times in the past, belief became conviction.

In a little moonlit glade, a mile or so from the camp of the raiders,
her rescuer halted and dropped her to the ground.  His roughness
surprised her, but still she had no doubts.  Again she called him by
name, and at the same instant the ape, fretting under the restraints of
the unaccustomed garments of the Tarmangani, tore the burnoose from
him, revealing to the eyes of the horror-struck woman the hideous face
and hairy form of a giant anthropoid.

With a piteous wail of terror, Jane Clayton swooned, while, from the
concealment of a nearby bush, Numa, the lion, eyed the pair hungrily
and licked his chops.


Tarzan, entering the tent of Achmet Zek, searched the interior
thoroughly.  He tore the bed to pieces and scattered the contents of
box and bag about the floor.  He investigated whatever his eyes
discovered, nor did those keen organs overlook a single article within
the habitation of the raider chief; but no pouch or pretty pebbles
rewarded his thoroughness.

Satisfied at last that his belongings were not in the possession of
Achmet Zek, unless they were on the person of the chief himself, Tarzan
decided to secure the person of the she before further prosecuting his
search for the pouch.

Motioning for Chulk to follow him, he passed out of the tent by the
same way that he had entered it, and walking boldly through the
village, made directly for the hut where Jane Clayton had been
imprisoned.

He noted with surprise the absence of Taglat, whom he had expected to
find awaiting him outside the tent of Achmet Zek; but, accustomed as he
was to the unreliability of apes, he gave no serious attention to the
present defection of his surly companion.  So long as Taglat did not
cause interference with his plans, Tarzan was indifferent to his
absence.

As he approached the hut, the ape-man noticed that a crowd had
collected about the entrance.  He could see that the men who composed
it were much excited, and fearing lest Chulk's disguise should prove
inadequate to the concealment of his true identity in the face of so
many observers, he commanded the ape to betake himself to the far end
of the village, and there await him.

As Chulk waddled off, keeping to the shadows, Tarzan advanced boldly
toward the excited group before the doorway of the hut.  He mingled
with the blacks and the Arabs in an endeavor to learn the cause of the
commotion, in his interest forgetting that he alone of the assemblage
carried a spear, a bow and arrows, and thus might become an object of
suspicious attention.

Shouldering his way through the crowd he approached the doorway, and
had almost reached it when one of the Arabs laid a hand upon his
shoulder, crying: "Who is this?" at the same time snatching back the
hood from the ape-man's face.

Tarzan of the Apes in all his savage life had never been accustomed to
pause in argument with an antagonist.  The primitive instinct of
self-preservation acknowledges many arts and wiles; but argument is not
one of them, nor did he now waste precious time in an attempt to
convince the raiders that he was not a wolf in sheep's clothing.
Instead he had his unmasker by the throat ere the man's words had
scarce quitted his lips, and hurling him from side to side brushed away
those who would have swarmed upon him.

Using the Arab as a weapon, Tarzan forced his way quickly to the
doorway, and a moment later was within the hut.  A hasty examination
revealed the fact that it was empty, and his sense of smell discovered,
too, the scent spoor of Taglat, the ape.  Tarzan uttered a low, ominous
growl.  Those who were pressing forward at the doorway to seize him,
fell back as the savage notes of the bestial challenge smote upon their
ears.  They looked at one another in surprise and consternation.  A man
had entered the hut alone, and yet with their own ears they had heard
the voice of a wild beast within.  What could it mean?  Had a lion or a
leopard sought sanctuary in the interior, unbeknown to the sentries?

Tarzan's quick eyes discovered the opening in the roof, through which
Taglat had fallen.  He guessed that the ape had either come or gone by
way of the break, and while the Arabs hesitated without, he sprang,
catlike, for the opening, grasped the top of the wall and clambered out
upon the roof, dropping instantly to the ground at the rear of the hut.

When the Arabs finally mustered courage to enter the hut, after firing
several volleys through the walls, they found the interior deserted.
At the same time Tarzan, at the far end of the village, sought for
Chulk; but the ape was nowhere to be found.

Robbed of his she, deserted by his companions, and as much in ignorance
as ever as to the whereabouts of his pouch and pebbles, it was an angry
Tarzan who climbed the palisade and vanished into the darkness of the
jungle.

For the present he must give up the search for his pouch, since it
would be paramount to self-destruction to enter the Arab camp now while
all its inhabitants were aroused and upon the alert.

In his escape from the village, the ape-man had lost the spoor of the
fleeing Taglat, and now he circled widely through the forest in an
endeavor to again pick it up.

Chulk had remained at his post until the cries and shots of the Arabs
had filled his simple soul with terror, for above all things the ape
folk fear the thunder-sticks of the Tarmangani; then he had clambered
nimbly over the palisade, tearing his burnoose in the effort, and fled
into the depths of the jungle, grumbling and scolding as he went.

Tarzan, roaming the jungle in search of the trail of Taglat and the
she, traveled swiftly.  In a little moonlit glade ahead of him the
great ape was bending over the prostrate form of the woman Tarzan
sought.  The beast was tearing at the bonds that confined her ankles
and wrists, pulling and gnawing upon the cords.

The course the ape-man was taking would carry him but a short distance
to the right of them, and though he could not have seen them the wind
was bearing down from them to him, carrying their scent spoor strongly
toward him.

A moment more and Jane Clayton's safety might have been assured, even
though Numa, the lion, was already gathering himself in preparation for
a charge; but Fate, already all too cruel, now outdid herself--the wind
veered suddenly for a few moments, the scent spoor that would have led
the ape-man to the girl's side was wafted in the opposite direction;
Tarzan passed within fifty yards of the tragedy that was being enacted
in the glade, and the opportunity was gone beyond recall.




18

The Fight For the Treasure


It was morning before Tarzan could bring himself to a realization of
the possibility of failure of his quest, and even then he would only
admit that success was but delayed.  He would eat and sleep, and then
set forth again.  The jungle was wide; but wide too were the experience
and cunning of Tarzan.  Taglat might travel far; but Tarzan would find
him in the end, though he had to search every tree in the mighty forest.

Soliloquizing thus, the ape-man followed the spoor of Bara, the deer,
the unfortunate upon which he had decided to satisfy his hunger.  For
half an hour the trail led the ape-man toward the east along a
well-marked game path, when suddenly, to the stalker's astonishment,
the quarry broke into sight, racing madly back along the narrow way
straight toward the hunter.

Tarzan, who had been following along the trail, leaped so quickly to
the concealing verdure at the side that the deer was still unaware of
the presence of an enemy in this direction, and while the animal was
still some distance away, the ape-man swung into the lower branches of
the tree which overhung the trail.  There he crouched, a savage beast
of prey, awaiting the coming of its victim.

What had frightened the deer into so frantic a retreat, Tarzan did not
know--Numa, the lion, perhaps, or Sheeta, the panther; but whatsoever
it was mattered little to Tarzan of the Apes--he was ready and willing
to defend his kill against any other denizen of the jungle.  If he were
unable to do it by means of physical prowess, he had at his command
another and a greater power--his shrewd intelligence.

And so, on came the running deer, straight into the jaws of death.  The
ape-man turned so that his back was toward the approaching animal.  He
poised with bent knees upon the gently swaying limb above the trail,
timing with keen ears the nearing hoof beats of frightened Bara.

In a moment the victim flashed beneath the limb and at the same instant
the ape-man above sprang out and down upon its back.  The weight of the
man's body carried the deer to the ground.  It stumbled forward once in
a futile effort to rise, and then mighty muscles dragged its head far
back, gave the neck a vicious wrench, and Bara was dead.

Quick had been the killing, and equally quick were the ape-man's
subsequent actions, for who might know what manner of killer pursued
Bara, or how close at hand he might be?  Scarce had the neck of the
victim snapped than the carcass was hanging over one of Tarzan's broad
shoulders, and an instant later the ape-man was perched once more among
the lower branches of a tree above the trail, his keen, gray eyes
scanning the pathway down which the deer had fled.

Nor was it long before the cause of Bara's fright became evident to
Tarzan, for presently came the unmistakable sounds of approaching
horsemen.  Dragging his kill after him the ape-man ascended to the
middle terrace, and settling himself comfortably in the crotch of a
tree where he could still view the trail beneath, cut a juicy steak
from the deer's loin, and burying his strong, white teeth in the hot
flesh proceeded to enjoy the fruits of his prowess and his cunning.

Nor did he neglect the trail beneath while he satisfied his hunger.
His sharp eyes saw the muzzle of the leading horse as it came into view
around a bend in the tortuous trail, and one by one they scrutinized
the riders as they passed beneath him in single file.

Among them came one whom Tarzan recognized, but so schooled was the
ape-man in the control of his emotions that no slightest change of
expression, much less any hysterical demonstration that might have
revealed his presence, betrayed the fact of his inward excitement.

Beneath him, as unconscious of his presence as were the Abyssinians
before and behind him, rode Albert Werper, while the ape-man
scrutinized the Belgian for some sign of the pouch which he had stolen.

As the Abyssinians rode toward the south, a giant figure hovered ever
upon their trail--a huge, almost naked white man, who carried the
bloody carcass of a deer upon his shoulders, for Tarzan knew that he
might not have another opportunity to hunt for some time if he were to
follow the Belgian.

To endeavor to snatch him from the midst of the armed horsemen, not
even Tarzan would attempt other than in the last extremity, for the way
of the wild is the way of caution and cunning, unless they be aroused
to rashness by pain or anger.

So the Abyssinians and the Belgian marched southward and Tarzan of the
Apes swung silently after them through the swaying branches of the
middle terrace.

A two days' march brought them to a level plain beyond which lay
mountains--a plain which Tarzan remembered and which aroused within him
vague half memories and strange longings.  Out upon the plain the
horsemen rode, and at a safe distance behind them crept the ape-man,
taking advantage of such cover as the ground afforded.

Beside a charred pile of timbers the Abyssinians halted, and Tarzan,
sneaking close and concealing himself in nearby shrubbery, watched them
in wonderment.  He saw them digging up the earth, and he wondered if
they had hidden meat there in the past and now had come for it.  Then
he recalled how he had buried his pretty pebbles, and the suggestion
that had caused him to do it.  They were digging for the things the
blacks had buried here!

Presently he saw them uncover a dirty, yellow object, and he witnessed
the joy of Werper and of Abdul Mourak as the grimy object was exposed
to view.  One by one they unearthed many similar pieces, all of the
same uniform, dirty yellow, until a pile of them lay upon the ground, a
pile which Abdul Mourak fondled and petted in an ecstasy of greed.

Something stirred in the ape-man's mind as he looked long upon the
golden ingots.  Where had he seen such before?  What were they?  Why
did these Tarmangani covet them so greatly?  To whom did they belong?

He recalled the black men who had buried them.  The things must be
theirs.  Werper was stealing them as he had stolen Tarzan's pouch of
pebbles.  The ape-man's eyes blazed in anger.  He would like to find
the black men and lead them against these thieves.  He wondered where
their village might be.

As all these things ran through the active mind, a party of men moved
out of the forest at the edge of the plain and advanced toward the
ruins of the burned bungalow.

Abdul Mourak, always watchful, was the first to see them, but already
they were halfway across the open.  He called to his men to mount and
hold themselves in readiness, for in the heart of Africa who may know
whether a strange host be friend or foe?

Werper, swinging into his saddle, fastened his eyes upon the newcomers,
then, white and trembling he turned toward Abdul Mourak.

"It is Achmet Zek and his raiders," he whispered.  "They are come for
the gold."

It must have been at about the same instant that Achmet Zek discovered
the pile of yellow ingots and realized the actuality of what he had
already feared since first his eyes had alighted upon the party beside
the ruins of the Englishman's bungalow.  Someone had forestalled
him--another had come for the treasure ahead of him.

The Arab was crazed by rage.  Recently everything had gone against him.
He had lost the jewels, the Belgian, and for the second time he had
lost the Englishwoman.  Now some one had come to rob him of this
treasure which he had thought as safe from disturbance here as though
it never had been mined.

He cared not whom the thieves might be.  They would not give up the
gold without a battle, of that he was certain, and with a wild whoop
and a command to his followers, Achmet Zek put spurs to his horse and
dashed down upon the Abyssinians, and after him, waving their long guns
above their heads, yelling and cursing, came his motley horde of
cut-throat followers.

The men of Abdul Mourak met them with a volley which emptied a few
saddles, and then the raiders were among them, and sword, pistol and
musket, each was doing its most hideous and bloody work.

Achmet Zek, spying Werper at the first charge, bore down upon the
Belgian, and the latter, terrified by contemplation of the fate he
deserved, turned his horse's head and dashed madly away in an effort to
escape.  Shouting to a lieutenant to take command, and urging him upon
pain of death to dispatch the Abyssinians and bring the gold back to
his camp, Achmet Zek set off across the plain in pursuit of the
Belgian, his wicked nature unable to forego the pleasures of revenge,
even at the risk of sacrificing the treasure.

As the pursued and the pursuer raced madly toward the distant forest
the battle behind them raged with bloody savageness.  No quarter was
asked or given by either the ferocious Abyssinians or the murderous
cut-throats of Achmet Zek.

From the concealment of the shrubbery Tarzan watched the sanguinary
conflict which so effectually surrounded him that he found no loop-hole
through which he might escape to follow Werper and the Arab chief.

The Abyssinians were formed in a circle which included Tarzan's
position, and around and into them galloped the yelling raiders, now
darting away, now charging in to deliver thrusts and cuts with their
curved swords.

Numerically the men of Achmet Zek were superior, and slowly but surely
the soldiers of Menelek were being exterminated.  To Tarzan the result
was immaterial.  He watched with but a single purpose--to escape the
ring of blood-mad fighters and be away after the Belgian and his pouch.

When he had first discovered Werper upon the trail where he had slain
Bara, he had thought that his eyes must be playing him false, so
certain had he been that the thief had been slain and devoured by Numa;
but after following the detachment for two days, with his keen eyes
always upon the Belgian, he no longer doubted the identity of the man,
though he was put to it to explain the identity of the mutilated corpse
he had supposed was the man he sought.

As he crouched in hiding among the unkempt shrubbery which so short a
while since had been the delight and pride of the wife he no longer
recalled, an Arab and an Abyssinian wheeled their mounts close to his
position as they slashed at each other with their swords.

Step by step the Arab beat back his adversary until the latter's horse
all but trod upon the ape-man, and then a vicious cut clove the black
warrior's skull, and the corpse toppled backward almost upon Tarzan.

As the Abyssinian tumbled from his saddle the possibility of escape
which was represented by the riderless horse electrified the ape-man to
instant action.  Before the frightened beast could gather himself for
flight a naked giant was astride his back.  A strong hand had grasped
his bridle rein, and the surprised Arab discovered a new foe in the
saddle of him, whom he had slain.

But this enemy wielded no sword, and his spear and bow remained upon
his back.  The Arab, recovered from his first surprise, dashed in with
raised sword to annihilate this presumptuous stranger.  He aimed a
mighty blow at the ape-man's head, a blow which swung harmlessly
through thin air as Tarzan ducked from its path, and then the Arab felt
the other's horse brushing his leg, a great arm shot out and encircled
his waist, and before he could recover himself he was dragged from his
saddle, and forming a shield for his antagonist was borne at a mad run
straight through the encircling ranks of his fellows.

Just beyond them he was tossed aside upon the ground, and the last he
saw of his strange foeman the latter was galloping off across the plain
in the direction of the forest at its farther edge.

For another hour the battle raged nor did it cease until the last of
the Abyssinians lay dead upon the ground, or had galloped off toward
the north in flight.  But a handful of men escaped, among them Abdul
Mourak.

The victorious raiders collected about the pile of golden ingots which
the Abyssinians had uncovered, and there awaited the return of their
leader.  Their exultation was slightly tempered by the glimpse they had
had of the strange apparition of the naked white man galloping away
upon the horse of one of their foemen and carrying a companion who was
now among them expatiating upon the superhuman strength of the ape-man.
None of them there but was familiar with the name and fame of Tarzan of
the Apes, and the fact that they had recognized the white giant as the
ferocious enemy of the wrongdoers of the jungle, added to their terror,
for they had been assured that Tarzan was dead.

Naturally superstitious, they fully believed that they had seen the
disembodied spirit of the dead man, and now they cast fearful glances
about them in expectation of the ghost's early return to the scene of
the ruin they had inflicted upon him during their recent raid upon his
home, and discussed in affrighted whispers the probable nature of the
vengeance which the spirit would inflict upon them should he return to
find them in possession of his gold.

As they conversed their terror grew, while from the concealment of the
reeds along the river below them a small party of naked, black warriors
watched their every move.  From the heights beyond the river these
black men had heard the noise of the conflict, and creeping warily down
to the stream had forded it and advanced through the reeds until they
were in a position to watch every move of the combatants.

For a half hour the raiders awaited Achmet Zek's return, their fear of
the earlier return of the ghost of Tarzan constantly undermining their
loyalty to and fear of their chief.  Finally one among them voiced the
desires of all when he announced that he intended riding forth toward
the forest in search of Achmet Zek.  Instantly every man of them sprang
to his mount.

"The gold will be safe here," cried one.  "We have killed the
Abyssinians and there are no others to carry it away.  Let us ride in
search of Achmet Zek!"

And a moment later, amidst a cloud of dust, the raiders were galloping
madly across the plain, and out from the concealment of the reeds along
the river, crept a party of black warriors toward the spot where the
golden ingots of Opar lay piled on the ground.

Werper had still been in advance of Achmet Zek when he reached the
forest; but the latter, better mounted, was gaining upon him.  Riding
with the reckless courage of desperation the Belgian urged his mount to
greater speed even within the narrow confines of the winding, game
trail that the beast was following.

Behind him he could hear the voice of Achmet Zek crying to him to halt;
but Werper only dug the spurs deeper into the bleeding sides of his
panting mount.  Two hundred yards within the forest a broken branch lay
across the trail.  It was a small thing that a horse might ordinarily
take in his natural stride without noticing its presence; but Werper's
horse was jaded, his feet were heavy with weariness, and as the branch
caught between his front legs he stumbled, was unable to recover
himself, and went down, sprawling in the trail.

Werper, going over his head, rolled a few yards farther on, scrambled
to his feet and ran back.  Seizing the reins he tugged to drag the
beast to his feet; but the animal would not or could not rise, and as
the Belgian cursed and struck at him, Achmet Zek appeared in view.

Instantly the Belgian ceased his efforts with the dying animal at his
feet, and seizing his rifle, dropped behind the horse and fired at the
oncoming Arab.

His bullet, going low, struck Achmet Zek's horse in the breast,
bringing him down a hundred yards from where Werper lay preparing to
fire a second shot.

The Arab, who had gone down with his mount, was standing astride him,
and seeing the Belgian's strategic position behind his fallen horse,
lost no time in taking up a similar one behind his own.

And there the two lay, alternately firing at and cursing each other,
while from behind the Arab, Tarzan of the Apes approached to the edge
of the forest.  Here he heard the occasional shots of the duelists, and
choosing the safer and swifter avenue of the forest branches to the
uncertain transportation afforded by a half-broken Abyssinian pony,
took to the trees.

Keeping to one side of the trail, the ape-man came presently to a point
where he could look down in comparative safety upon the fighters.
First one and then the other would partially raise himself above his
breastwork of horseflesh, fire his weapon and immediately drop flat
behind his shelter, where he would reload and repeat the act a moment
later.

Werper had but little ammunition, having been hastily armed by Abdul
Mourak from the body of one of the first of the Abyssinians who had
fallen in the fight about the pile of ingots, and now he realized that
soon he would have used his last bullet, and be at the mercy of the
Arab--a mercy with which he was well acquainted.

Facing both death and despoilment of his treasure, the Belgian cast
about for some plan of escape, and the only one that appealed to him as
containing even a remote possibility of success hinged upon the chance
of bribing Achmet Zek.

Werper had fired all but a single cartridge, when, during a lull in the
fighting, he called aloud to his opponent.

"Achmet Zek," he cried, "Allah alone knows which one of us may leave
our bones to rot where he lies upon this trail today if we keep up our
foolish battle.  You wish the contents of the pouch I wear about my
waist, and I wish my life and my liberty even more than I do the
jewels.  Let us each, then, take that which he most desires and go our
separate ways in peace.  I will lay the pouch upon the carcass of my
horse, where you may see it, and you, in turn, will lay your gun upon
your horse, with butt toward me.  Then I will go away, leaving the
pouch to you, and you will let me go in safety.  I want only my life,
and my freedom."

The Arab thought in silence for a moment.  Then he spoke. His reply was
influenced by the fact that he had expended his last shot.

"Go your way, then," he growled, "leaving the pouch in plain sight
behind you.  See, I lay my gun thus, with the butt toward you.  Go."

Werper removed the pouch from about his waist.  Sorrowfully and
affectionately he let his fingers press the hard outlines of the
contents.  Ah, if he could extract a little handful of the precious
stones!  But Achmet Zek was standing now, his eagle eyes commanding a
plain view of the Belgian and his every act.

Regretfully Werper laid the pouch, its contents undisturbed, upon the
body of his horse, rose, and taking his rifle with him, backed slowly
down the trail until a turn hid him from the view of the watchful Arab.

Even then Achmet Zek did not advance, fearful as he was of some such
treachery as he himself might have been guilty of under like
circumstances; nor were his suspicions groundless, for the Belgian, no
sooner had he passed out of the range of the Arab's vision, halted
behind the bole of a tree, where he still commanded an unobstructed
view of his dead horse and the pouch, and raising his rifle covered the
spot where the other's body must appear when he came forward to seize
the treasure.

But Achmet Zek was no fool to expose himself to the blackened honor of
a thief and a murderer.  Taking his long gun with him, he left the
trail, entering the rank and tangled vegetation which walled it, and
crawling slowly forward on hands and knees he paralleled the trail; but
never for an instant was his body exposed to the rifle of the hidden
assassin.

Thus Achmet Zek advanced until he had come opposite the dead horse of
his enemy.  The pouch lay there in full view, while a short distance
along the trail, Werper waited in growing impatience and nervousness,
wondering why the Arab did not come to claim his reward.

Presently he saw the muzzle of a rifle appear suddenly and mysteriously
a few inches above the pouch, and before he could realize the cunning
trick that the Arab had played upon him the sight of the weapon was
adroitly hooked into the rawhide thong which formed the carrying strap
of the pouch, and the latter was drawn quickly from his view into the
dense foliage at the trail's side.

Not for an instant had the raider exposed a square inch of his body,
and Werper dared not fire his one remaining shot unless every chance of
a successful hit was in his favor.

Chuckling to himself, Achmet Zek withdrew a few paces farther into the
jungle, for he was as positive that Werper was waiting nearby for a
chance to pot him as though his eyes had penetrated the jungle trees to
the figure of the hiding Belgian, fingering his rifle behind the bole
of the buttressed giant.

Werper did not dare advance--his cupidity would not permit him to
depart, and so he stood there, his rifle ready in his hands, his eyes
watching the trail before him with catlike intensity.

But there was another who had seen the pouch and recognized it, who did
advance with Achmet Zek, hovering above him, as silent and as sure as
death itself, and as the Arab, finding a little spot less overgrown
with bushes than he had yet encountered, prepared to gloat his eyes
upon the contents of the pouch, Tarzan paused directly above him,
intent upon the same object.

Wetting his thin lips with his tongue, Achmet Zek loosened the tie
strings which closed the mouth of the pouch, and cupping one claw-like
hand poured forth a portion of the contents into his palm.

A single look he took at the stones lying in his hand.  His eyes
narrowed, a curse broke from his lips, and he hurled the small objects
upon the ground, disdainfully.  Quickly he emptied the balance of the
contents until he had scanned each separate stone, and as he dumped
them all upon the ground and stamped upon them his rage grew until the
muscles of his face worked in demon-like fury, and his fingers clenched
until his nails bit into the flesh.

Above, Tarzan watched in wonderment.  He had been curious to discover
what all the pow-wow about his pouch had meant.  He wanted to see what
the Arab would do after the other had gone away, leaving the pouch
behind him, and, having satisfied his curiosity, he would then have
pounced upon Achmet Zek and taken the pouch and his pretty pebbles away
from him, for did they not belong to Tarzan?

He saw the Arab now throw aside the empty pouch, and grasping his long
gun by the barrel, clublike, sneak stealthily through the jungle beside
the trail along which Werper had gone.

As the man disappeared from his view, Tarzan dropped to the ground and
commenced gathering up the spilled contents of the pouch, and the
moment that he obtained his first near view of the scattered pebbles he
understood the rage of the Arab, for instead of the glittering and
scintillating gems which had first caught and held the attention of the
ape-man, the pouch now contained but a collection of ordinary river
pebbles.




19

Jane Clayton and the Beasts of the Jungle


Mugambi, after his successful break for liberty, had fallen upon hard
times.  His way had led him through a country with which he was
unfamiliar, a jungle country in which he could find no water, and but
little food, so that after several days of wandering he found himself
so reduced in strength that he could barely drag himself along.

It was with growing difficulty that he found the strength necessary to
construct a shelter by night wherein he might be reasonably safe from
the large carnivora, and by day he still further exhausted his strength
in digging for edible roots, and searching for water.

A few stagnant pools at considerable distances apart saved him from
death by thirst; but his was a pitiable state when finally he stumbled
by accident upon a large river in a country where fruit was abundant,
and small game which he might bag by means of a combination of stealth,
cunning, and a crude knob-stick which he had fashioned from a fallen
limb.

Realizing that he still had a long march ahead of him before he could
reach even the outskirts of the Waziri country, Mugambi wisely decided
to remain where he was until he had recuperated his strength and
health.  A few days' rest would accomplish wonders for him, he knew,
and he could ill afford to sacrifice his chances for a safe return by
setting forth handicapped by weakness.

And so it was that he constructed a substantial thorn boma, and rigged
a thatched shelter within it, where he might sleep by night in
security, and from which he sallied forth by day to hunt the flesh
which alone could return to his giant thews their normal prowess.

One day, as he hunted, a pair of savage eyes discovered him from the
concealment of the branches of a great tree beneath which the black
warrior passed.  Bloodshot, wicked eyes they were, set in a fierce and
hairy face.

They watched Mugambi make his little kill of a small rodent, and they
followed him as he returned to his hut, their owner moving quietly
through the trees upon the trail of the Negro.

The creature was Chulk, and he looked down upon the unconscious man
more in curiosity than in hate.  The wearing of the Arab burnoose which
Tarzan had placed upon his person had aroused in the mind of the
anthropoid a desire for similar mimicry of the Tarmangani.  The
burnoose, though, had obstructed his movements and proven such a
nuisance that the ape had long since torn it from him and thrown it
away.

Now, however, he saw a Gomangani arrayed in less cumbersome apparel--a
loin cloth, a few copper ornaments and a feather headdress.  These were
more in line with Chulk's desires than a flowing robe which was
constantly getting between one's legs, and catching upon every limb and
bush along the leafy trail.

Chulk eyed the pouch, which, suspended over Mugambi's shoulder, swung
beside his black hip.  This took his fancy, for it was ornamented with
feathers and a fringe, and so the ape hung about Mugambi's boma,
waiting an opportunity to seize either by stealth or might some object
of the black's apparel.

Nor was it long before the opportunity came.  Feeling safe within his
thorny enclosure, Mugambi was wont to stretch himself in the shade of
his shelter during the heat of the day, and sleep in peaceful security
until the declining sun carried with it the enervating temperature of
midday.

Watching from above, Chulk saw the black warrior stretched thus in the
unconsciousness of sleep one sultry afternoon.  Creeping out upon an
overhanging branch the anthropoid dropped to the ground within the
boma.  He approached the sleeper upon padded feet which gave forth no
sound, and with an uncanny woodcraft that rustled not a leaf or a grass
blade.

Pausing beside the man, the ape bent over and examined his belongings.
Great as was the strength of Chulk there lay in the back of his little
brain a something which deterred him from arousing the man to combat--a
sense that is inherent in all the lower orders, a strange fear of man,
that rules even the most powerful of the jungle creatures at times.

To remove Mugambi's loin cloth without awakening him would be
impossible, and the only detachable things were the knob-stick and the
pouch, which had fallen from the black's shoulder as he rolled in sleep.

Seizing these two articles, as better than nothing at all, Chulk
retreated with haste, and every indication of nervous terror, to the
safety of the tree from which he had dropped, and, still haunted by
that indefinable terror which the close proximity of man awakened in
his breast, fled precipitately through the jungle.  Aroused by attack,
or supported by the presence of another of his kind, Chulk could have
braved the presence of a score of human beings, but alone--ah, that was
a different matter--alone, and unenraged.

It was some time after Mugambi awoke that he missed the pouch.
Instantly he was all excitement.  What could have become of it?  It had
been at his side when he lay down to sleep--of that he was certain, for
had he not pushed it from beneath him when its bulging bulk, pressing
against his ribs, caused him discomfort?  Yes, it had been there when
he lay down to sleep.  How then had it vanished?

Mugambi's savage imagination was filled with visions of the spirits of
departed friends and enemies, for only to the machinations of such as
these could he attribute the disappearance of his pouch and knob-stick
in the first excitement of the discovery of their loss; but later and
more careful investigation, such as his woodcraft made possible,
revealed indisputable evidence of a more material explanation than his
excited fancy and superstition had at first led him to accept.

In the trampled turf beside him was the faint impress of huge, manlike
feet.  Mugambi raised his brows as the truth dawned upon him.  Hastily
leaving the boma he searched in all directions about the enclosure for
some further sign of the tell-tale spoor.  He climbed trees and sought
for evidence of the direction of the thief's flight; but the faint
signs left by a wary ape who elects to travel through the trees eluded
the woodcraft of Mugambi.  Tarzan might have followed them; but no
ordinary mortal could perceive them, or perceiving, translate.

The black, now strengthened and refreshed by his rest, felt ready to
set out again for Waziri, and finding himself another knob-stick,
turned his back upon the river and plunged into the mazes of the jungle.

As Taglat struggled with the bonds which secured the ankles and wrists
of his captive, the great lion that eyed the two from behind a nearby
clump of bushes wormed closer to his intended prey.

The ape's back was toward the lion.  He did not see the broad head,
fringed by its rough mane, protruding through the leafy wall.  He could
not know that the powerful hind paws were gathering close beneath the
tawny belly preparatory to a sudden spring, and his first intimation of
impending danger was the thunderous and triumphant roar which the
charging lion could no longer suppress.

Scarce pausing for a backward glance, Taglat abandoned the unconscious
woman and fled in the opposite direction from the horrid sound which
had broken in so unexpected and terrifying a manner upon his startled
ears; but the warning had come too late to save him, and the lion, in
his second bound, alighted full upon the broad shoulders of the
anthropoid.

As the great bull went down there was awakened in him to the full all
the cunning, all the ferocity, all the physical prowess which obey the
mightiest of the fundamental laws of nature, the law of
self-preservation, and turning upon his back he closed with the
carnivore in a death struggle so fearless and abandoned, that for a
moment the great Numa himself may have trembled for the outcome.

Seizing the lion by the mane, Taglat buried his yellowed fangs deep in
the monster's throat, growling hideously through the muffled gag of
blood and hair.  Mixed with the ape's voice the lion's roars of rage
and pain reverberated through the jungle, till the lesser creatures of
the wild, startled from their peaceful pursuits, scurried fearfully
away.

Rolling over and over upon the turf the two battled with demoniac fury,
until the colossal cat, by doubling his hind paws far up beneath his
belly sank his talons deep into Taglat's chest, then, ripping downward
with all his strength, Numa accomplished his design, and the
disemboweled anthropoid, with a last spasmodic struggle, relaxed in
limp and bloody dissolution beneath his titanic adversary.

Scrambling to his feet, Numa looked about quickly in all directions, as
though seeking to detect the possible presence of other foes; but only
the still and unconscious form of the girl, lying a few paces from him
met his gaze, and with an angry growl he placed a forepaw upon the body
of his kill and raising his head gave voice to his savage victory cry.

For another moment he stood with fierce eyes roving to and fro about
the clearing.  At last they halted for a second time upon the girl.  A
low growl rumbled from the lion's throat.  His lower jaw rose and fell,
and the slaver drooled and dripped upon the dead face of Taglat.

Like two yellow-green augurs, wide and unblinking, the terrible eyes
remained fixed upon Jane Clayton.  The erect and majestic pose of the
great frame shrank suddenly into a sinister crouch as, slowly and
gently as one who treads on eggs, the devil-faced cat crept forward
toward the girl.

Beneficent Fate maintained her in happy unconsciousness of the dread
presence sneaking stealthily upon her.  She did not know when the lion
paused at her side.  She did not hear the sniffing of his nostrils as
he smelled about her.  She did not feel the heat of the fetid breath
upon her face, nor the dripping of the saliva from the frightful jaws
half opened so close above her.

Finally the lion lifted a forepaw and turned the body of the girl half
over, then he stood again eyeing her as though still undetermined
whether life was extinct or not.  Some noise or odor from the nearby
jungle attracted his attention for a moment.  His eyes did not again
return to Jane Clayton, and presently he left her, walked over to the
remains of Taglat, and crouching down upon his kill with his back
toward the girl, proceeded to devour the ape.

It was upon this scene that Jane Clayton at last opened her eyes.
Inured to danger, she maintained her self-possession in the face of the
startling surprise which her new-found consciousness revealed to her.
She neither cried out nor moved a muscle, until she had taken in every
detail of the scene which lay within the range of her vision.

She saw that the lion had killed the ape, and that he was devouring his
prey less than fifty feet from where she lay; but what could she do?
Her hands and feet were bound.  She must wait then, in what patience
she could command, until Numa had eaten and digested the ape, when,
without doubt, he would return to feast upon her, unless, in the
meantime, the dread hyenas should discover her, or some other of the
numerous prowling carnivora of the jungle.

As she lay tormented by these frightful thoughts, she suddenly became
conscious that the bonds at her wrists and ankles no longer hurt her,
and then of the fact that her hands were separated, one lying upon
either side of her, instead of both being confined at her back.

Wonderingly she moved a hand.  What miracle had been performed?  It was
not bound!  Stealthily and noiselessly she moved her other limbs, only
to discover that she was free.  She could not know how the thing had
happened, that Taglat, gnawing upon them for sinister purposes of his
own, had cut them through but an instant before Numa had frightened him
from his victim.

For a moment Jane Clayton was overwhelmed with joy and thanksgiving;
but only for a moment.  What good was her new-found liberty in the face
of the frightful beast crouching so close beside her?  If she could
have had this chance under different conditions, how happily she would
have taken advantage of it; but now it was given to her when escape was
practically impossible.

The nearest tree was a hundred feet away, the lion less than fifty.  To
rise and attempt to reach the safety of those tantalizing branches
would be but to invite instant destruction, for Numa would doubtless be
too jealous of this future meal to permit it to escape with ease.  And
yet, too, there was another possibility--a chance which hinged entirely
upon the unknown temper of the great beast.

His belly already partially filled, he might watch with indifference
the departure of the girl; yet could she afford to chance so improbable
a contingency?  She doubted it.  Upon the other hand she was no more
minded to allow this frail opportunity for life to entirely elude her
without taking or attempting to take some advantage from it.

She watched the lion narrowly.  He could not see her without turning
his head more than halfway around.  She would attempt a ruse.  Silently
she rolled over in the direction of the nearest tree, and away from the
lion, until she lay again in the same position in which Numa had left
her, but a few feet farther from him.

Here she lay breathless watching the lion; but the beast gave no
indication that he had heard aught to arouse his suspicions.  Again she
rolled over, gaining a few more feet and again she lay in rigid
contemplation of the beast's back.

During what seemed hours to her tense nerves, Jane Clayton continued
these tactics, and still the lion fed on in apparent unconsciousness
that his second prey was escaping him.  Already the girl was but a few
paces from the tree--a moment more and she would be close enough to
chance springing to her feet, throwing caution aside and making a
sudden, bold dash for safety.  She was halfway over in her turn, her
face away from the lion, when he suddenly turned his great head and
fastened his eyes upon her.  He saw her roll over upon her side away
from him, and then her eyes were turned again toward him, and the cold
sweat broke from the girl's every pore as she realized that with life
almost within her grasp, death had found her out.

For a long time neither the girl nor the lion moved.  The beast lay
motionless, his head turned upon his shoulders and his glaring eyes
fixed upon the rigid victim, now nearly fifty yards away.  The girl
stared back straight into those cruel orbs, daring not to move even a
muscle.

The strain upon her nerves was becoming so unbearable that she could
scarcely restrain a growing desire to scream, when Numa deliberately
turned back to the business of feeding; but his back-layed ears
attested a sinister regard for the actions of the girl behind him.

Realizing that she could not again turn without attracting his
immediate and perhaps fatal attention, Jane Clayton resolved to risk
all in one last attempt to reach the tree and clamber to the lower
branches.

Gathering herself stealthily for the effort, she leaped suddenly to her
feet, but almost simultaneously the lion sprang up, wheeled and with
wide-distended jaws and terrific roars, charged swiftly down upon her.

Those who have spent lifetimes hunting the big game of Africa will tell
you that scarcely any other creature in the world attains the speed of
a charging lion.  For the short distance that the great cat can
maintain it, it resembles nothing more closely than the onrushing of a
giant locomotive under full speed, and so, though the distance that
Jane Clayton must cover was relatively small, the terrific speed of the
lion rendered her hopes of escape almost negligible.

Yet fear can work wonders, and though the upward spring of the lion as
he neared the tree into which she was scrambling brought his talons in
contact with her boots she eluded his raking grasp, and as he hurtled
against the bole of her sanctuary, the girl drew herself into the
safety of the branches above his reach.

For some time the lion paced, growling and moaning, beneath the tree in
which Jane Clayton crouched, panting and trembling.  The girl was a
prey to the nervous reaction from the frightful ordeal through which
she had so recently passed, and in her overwrought state it seemed that
never again should she dare descend to the ground among the fearsome
dangers which infested the broad stretch of jungle that she knew must
lie between herself and the nearest village of her faithful Waziri.

It was almost dark before the lion finally quit the clearing, and even
had his place beside the remnants of the mangled ape not been
immediately usurped by a pack of hyenas, Jane Clayton would scarcely
have dared venture from her refuge in the face of impending night, and
so she composed herself as best she could for the long and tiresome
wait, until daylight might offer some means of escape from the dread
vicinity in which she had witnessed such terrifying adventures.

Tired nature at last overcame even her fears, and she dropped into a
deep slumber, cradled in a comparatively safe, though rather
uncomfortable, position against the bole of the tree, and supported by
two large branches which grew outward, almost horizontally, but a few
inches apart.

The sun was high in the heavens when she at last awoke, and beneath her
was no sign either of Numa or the hyenas.  Only the clean-picked bones
of the ape, scattered about the ground, attested the fact of what had
transpired in this seemingly peaceful spot but a few hours before.

Both hunger and thirst assailed her now, and realizing that she must
descend or die of starvation, she at last summoned courage to undertake
the ordeal of continuing her journey through the jungle.

Descending from the tree, she set out in a southerly direction, toward
the point where she believed the plains of Waziri lay, and though she
knew that only ruin and desolation marked the spot where once her happy
home had stood, she hoped that by coming to the broad plain she might
eventually reach one of the numerous Waziri villages that were
scattered over the surrounding country, or chance upon a roving band of
these indefatigable huntsmen.

The day was half spent when there broke unexpectedly upon her startled
ears the sound of a rifle shot not far ahead of her.  As she paused to
listen, this first shot was followed by another and another and
another.  What could it mean?  The first explanation which sprung to
her mind attributed the firing to an encounter between the Arab raiders
and a party of Waziri; but as she did not know upon which side victory
might rest, or whether she were behind friend or foe, she dared not
advance nearer on the chance of revealing herself to an enemy.

After listening for several minutes she became convinced that no more
than two or three rifles were engaged in the fight, since nothing
approximating the sound of a volley reached her ears; but still she
hesitated to approach, and at last, determining to take no chance, she
climbed into the concealing foliage of a tree beside the trail she had
been following and there fearfully awaited whatever might reveal itself.

As the firing became less rapid she caught the sound of men's voices,
though she could distinguish no words, and at last the reports of the
guns ceased, and she heard two men calling to each other in loud tones.
Then there was a long silence which was finally broken by the stealthy
padding of footfalls on the trail ahead of her, and in another moment a
man appeared in view backing toward her, a rifle ready in his hands,
and his eyes directed in careful watchfulness along the way that he had
come.

Almost instantly Jane Clayton recognized the man as M.  Jules Frecoult,
who so recently had been a guest in her home.  She was upon the point
of calling to him in glad relief when she saw him leap quickly to one
side and hide himself in the thick verdure at the trail's side.  It was
evident that he was being followed by an enemy, and so Jane Clayton
kept silent, lest she distract Frecoult's attention, or guide his foe
to his hiding place.

Scarcely had Frecoult hidden himself than the figure of a white-robed
Arab crept silently along the trail in pursuit.  From her hiding place,
Jane Clayton could see both men plainly.  She recognized Achmet Zek as
the leader of the band of ruffians who had raided her home and made her
a prisoner, and as she saw Frecoult, the supposed friend and ally,
raise his gun and take careful aim at the Arab, her heart stood still
and every power of her soul was directed upon a fervent prayer for the
accuracy of his aim.

Achmet Zek paused in the middle of the trail.  His keen eyes scanned
every bush and tree within the radius of his vision.  His tall figure
presented a perfect target to the perfidious assassin.  There was a
sharp report, and a little puff of smoke arose from the bush that hid
the Belgian, as Achmet Zek stumbled forward and pitched, face down,
upon the trail.

As Werper stepped back into the trail, he was startled by the sound of
a glad cry from above him, and as he wheeled about to discover the
author of this unexpected interruption, he saw Jane Clayton drop
lightly from a nearby tree and run forward with outstretched hands to
congratulate him upon his victory.




20

Jane Clayton Again a Prisoner


Though her clothes were torn and her hair disheveled, Albert Werper
realized that he never before had looked upon such a vision of
loveliness as that which Lady Greystoke presented in the relief and joy
which she felt in coming so unexpectedly upon a friend and rescuer when
hope had seemed so far away.

If the Belgian had entertained any doubts as to the woman's knowledge
of his part in the perfidious attack upon her home and herself, it was
quickly dissipated by the genuine friendliness of her greeting.  She
told him quickly of all that had befallen her since he had departed
from her home, and as she spoke of the death of her husband her eyes
were veiled by the tears which she could not repress.

"I am shocked," said Werper, in well-simulated sympathy; "but I am not
surprised.  That devil there," and he pointed toward the body of Achmet
Zek, "has terrorized the entire country.  Your Waziri are either
exterminated, or have been driven out of their country, far to the
south.  The men of Achmet Zek occupy the plain about your former
home--there is neither sanctuary nor escape in that direction.  Our
only hope lies in traveling northward as rapidly as we may, of coming
to the camp of the raiders before the knowledge of Achmet Zek's death
reaches those who were left there, and of obtaining, through some ruse,
an escort toward the north.

"I think that the thing can be accomplished, for I was a guest of the
raider's before I knew the nature of the man, and those at the camp are
not aware that I turned against him when I discovered his villainy.

"Come!  We will make all possible haste to reach the camp before those
who accompanied Achmet Zek upon his last raid have found his body and
carried the news of his death to the cut-throats who remained behind.
It is our only hope, Lady Greystoke, and you must place your entire
faith in me if I am to succeed.  Wait for me here a moment while I take
from the Arab's body the wallet that he stole from me," and Werper
stepped quickly to the dead man's side, and, kneeling, sought with
quick fingers the pouch of jewels.  To his consternation, there was no
sign of them in the garments of Achmet Zek.  Rising, he walked back
along the trail, searching for some trace of the missing pouch or its
contents; but he found nothing, even though he searched carefully the
vicinity of his dead horse, and for a few paces into the jungle on
either side.  Puzzled, disappointed and angry, he at last returned to
the girl.  "The wallet is gone," he explained, crisply, "and I dare not
delay longer in search of it. We must reach the camp before the
returning raiders."

Unsuspicious of the man's true character, Jane Clayton saw nothing
peculiar in his plans, or in his specious explanation of his former
friendship for the raider, and so she grasped with alacrity the seeming
hope for safety which he proffered her, and turning about she set out
with Albert Werper toward the hostile camp in which she so lately had
been a prisoner.

It was late in the afternoon of the second day before they reached
their destination, and as they paused upon the edge of the clearing
before the gates of the walled village, Werper cautioned the girl to
accede to whatever he might suggest by his conversation with the
raiders.

"I shall tell them," he said, "that I apprehended you after you escaped
from the camp, that I took you to Achmet Zek, and that as he was
engaged in a stubborn battle with the Waziri, he directed me to return
to camp with you, to obtain here a sufficient guard, and to ride north
with you as rapidly as possible and dispose of you at the most
advantageous terms to a certain slave broker whose name he gave me."

Again the girl was deceived by the apparent frankness of the Belgian.
She realized that desperate situations required desperate handling, and
though she trembled inwardly at the thought of again entering the vile
and hideous village of the raiders she saw no better course than that
which her companion had suggested.

Calling aloud to those who tended the gates, Werper, grasping Jane
Clayton by the arm, walked boldly across the clearing.  Those who
opened the gates to him permitted their surprise to show clearly in
their expressions.  That the discredited and hunted lieutenant should
be thus returning fearlessly of his own volition, seemed to disarm them
quite as effectually as his manner toward Lady Greystoke had deceived
her.

The sentries at the gate returned Werper's salutations, and viewed with
astonishment the prisoner whom he brought into the village with him.

Immediately the Belgian sought the Arab who had been left in charge of
the camp during Achmet Zek's absence, and again his boldness disarmed
suspicion and won the acceptance of his false explanation of his
return.  The fact that he had brought back with him the woman prisoner
who had escaped, added strength to his claims, and Mohammed Beyd soon
found himself fraternizing good-naturedly with the very man whom he
would have slain without compunction had he discovered him alone in the
jungle a half hour before.

Jane Clayton was again confined to the prison hut she had formerly
occupied, but as she realized that this was but a part of the deception
which she and Frecoult were playing upon the credulous raiders, it was
with quite a different sensation that she again entered the vile and
filthy interior, from that which she had previously experienced, when
hope was so far away.

Once more she was bound and sentries placed before the door of her
prison; but before Werper left her he whispered words of cheer into her
ear.  Then he left, and made his way back to the tent of Mohammed Beyd.
He had been wondering how long it would be before the raiders who had
ridden out with Achmet Zek would return with the murdered body of their
chief, and the more he thought upon the matter the greater his fears
became, that without accomplices his plan would fail.

What, even, if he got away from the camp in safety before any returned
with the true story of his guilt--of what value would this advantage be
other than to protract for a few days his mental torture and his life?
These hard riders, familiar with every trail and bypath, would get him
long before he could hope to reach the coast.

As these thoughts passed through his mind he entered the tent where
Mohammed Beyd sat cross-legged upon a rug, smoking.  The Arab looked up
as the European came into his presence.

"Greetings, O Brother!" he said.

"Greetings!" replied Werper.

For a while neither spoke further.  The Arab was the first to break the
silence.

"And my master, Achmet Zek, was well when last you saw him?" he asked.

"Never was he safer from the sins and dangers of mortality," replied
the Belgian.

"It is well," said Mohammed Beyd, blowing a little puff of blue smoke
straight out before him.

Again there was silence for several minutes.

"And if he were dead?" asked the Belgian, determined to lead up to the
truth, and attempt to bribe Mohammed Beyd into his service.

The Arab's eyes narrowed and he leaned forward, his gaze boring
straight into the eyes of the Belgian.

"I have been thinking much, Werper, since you returned so unexpectedly
to the camp of the man whom you had deceived, and who sought you with
death in his heart.  I have been with Achmet Zek for many years--his
own mother never knew him so well as I. He never forgives--much less
would he again trust a man who had once betrayed him; that I know.

"I have thought much, as I said, and the result of my thinking has
assured me that Achmet Zek is dead--for otherwise you would never have
dared return to his camp, unless you be either a braver man or a bigger
fool than I have imagined.  And, if this evidence of my judgment is not
sufficient, I have but just now received from your own lips even more
confirmatory witness--for did you not say that Achmet Zek was never
more safe from the sins and dangers of mortality?

"Achmet Zek is dead--you need not deny it.  I was not his mother, or
his mistress, so do not fear that my wailings shall disturb you.  Tell
me why you have come back here. Tell me what you want, and, Werper, if
you still possess the jewels of which Achmet Zek told me, there is no
reason why you and I should not ride north together and divide the
ransom of the white woman and the contents of the pouch you wear about
your person. Eh?"

The evil eyes narrowed, a vicious, thin-lipped smile tortured the
villainous face, as Mohammed Beyd grinned knowingly into the face of
the Belgian.

Werper was both relieved and disturbed by the Arab's attitude.  The
complacency with which he accepted the death of his chief lifted a
considerable burden of apprehension from the shoulders of Achmet Zek's
assassin; but his demand for a share of the jewels boded ill for Werper
when Mohammed Beyd should have learned that the precious stones were no
longer in the Belgian's possession.

To acknowledge that he had lost the jewels might be to arouse the wrath
or suspicion of the Arab to such an extent as would jeopardize his
new-found chances of escape.  His one hope seemed, then, to lie in
fostering Mohammed Beyd's belief that the jewels were still in his
possession, and depend upon the accidents of the future to open an
avenue of escape.

Could he contrive to tent with the Arab upon the march north, he might
find opportunity in plenty to remove this menace to his life and
liberty--it was worth trying, and, further, there seemed no other way
out of his difficulty.

"Yes," he said, "Achmet Zek is dead.  He fell in battle with a company
of Abyssinian cavalry that held me captive.  During the fighting I
escaped; but I doubt if any of Achmet Zek's men live, and the gold they
sought is in the possession of the Abyssinians.  Even now they are
doubtless marching on this camp, for they were sent by Menelek to
punish Achmet Zek and his followers for a raid upon an Abyssinian
village.  There are many of them, and if we do not make haste to escape
we shall all suffer the same fate as Achmet Zek."

Mohammed Beyd listened in silence.  How much of the unbeliever's story
he might safely believe he did not know; but as it afforded him an
excuse for deserting the village and making for the north he was not
inclined to cross-question the Belgian too minutely.

"And if I ride north with you," he asked, "half the jewels and half the
ransom of the woman shall be mine?"

"Yes," replied Werper.

"Good," said Mohammed Beyd.  "I go now to give the order for the
breaking of camp early on the morrow," and he rose to leave the tent.

Werper laid a detaining hand upon his arm.

"Wait," he said, "let us determine how many shall accompany us.  It is
not well that we be burdened by the women and children, for then indeed
we might be overtaken by the Abyssinians.  It would be far better to
select a small guard of your bravest men, and leave word behind that we
are riding WEST.  Then, when the Abyssinians come they will be put upon
the wrong trail should they have it in their hearts to pursue us, and
if they do not they will at least ride north with less rapidity than as
though they thought that we were ahead of them."

"The serpent is less wise than thou, Werper," said Mohammed Beyd with a
smile.  "It shall be done as you say.  Twenty men shall accompany us,
and we shall ride WEST--when we leave the village."

"Good," cried the Belgian, and so it was arranged.

Early the next morning Jane Clayton, after an almost sleepless night,
was aroused by the sound of voices outside her prison, and a moment
later, M. Frecoult, and two Arabs entered.  The latter unbound her
ankles and lifted her to her feet.  Then her wrists were loosed, she
was given a handful of dry bread, and led out into the faint light of
dawn.

She looked questioningly at Frecoult, and at a moment that the Arab's
attention was attracted in another direction the man leaned toward her
and whispered that all was working out as he had planned.  Thus
assured, the young woman felt a renewal of the hope which the long and
miserable night of bondage had almost expunged.

Shortly after, she was lifted to the back of a horse, and surrounded by
Arabs, was escorted through the gateway of the village and off into the
jungle toward the west.  Half an hour later the party turned north, and
northerly was their direction for the balance of the march.

M. Frecoult spoke with her but seldom, and she understood that in
carrying out his deception he must maintain the semblance of her
captor, rather than protector, and so she suspected nothing though she
saw the friendly relations which seemed to exist between the European
and the Arab leader of the band.

If Werper succeeded in keeping himself from conversation with the young
woman, he failed signally to expel her from his thoughts.  A hundred
times a day he found his eyes wandering in her direction and feasting
themselves upon her charms of face and figure.  Each hour his
infatuation for her grew, until his desire to possess her gained almost
the proportions of madness.

If either the girl or Mohammed Beyd could have guessed what passed in
the mind of the man which each thought a friend and ally, the apparent
harmony of the little company would have been rudely disturbed.

Werper had not succeeded in arranging to tent with Mohammed Beyd, and
so he revolved many plans for the assassination of the Arab that would
have been greatly simplified had he been permitted to share the other's
nightly shelter.

Upon the second day out Mohammed Beyd reined his horse to the side of
the animal on which the captive was mounted.  It was, apparently, the
first notice which the Arab had taken of the girl; but many times
during these two days had his cunning eyes peered greedily from beneath
the hood of his burnoose to gloat upon the beauties of the prisoner.

Nor was this hidden infatuation of any recent origin.  He had conceived
it when first the wife of the Englishman had fallen into the hands of
Achmet Zek; but while that austere chieftain lived, Mohammed Beyd had
not even dared hope for a realization of his imaginings.

Now, though, it was different--only a despised dog of a Christian stood
between himself and possession of the girl.  How easy it would be to
slay the unbeliever, and take unto himself both the woman and the
jewels!  With the latter in his possession, the ransom which might be
obtained for the captive would form no great inducement to her
relinquishment in the face of the pleasures of sole ownership of her.
Yes, he would kill Werper, retain all the jewels and keep the
Englishwoman.

He turned his eyes upon her as she rode along at his side.  How
beautiful she was!  His fingers opened and closed--skinny, brown talons
itching to feel the soft flesh of the victim in their remorseless
clutch.

"Do you know," he asked leaning toward her, "where this man would take
you?"

Jane Clayton nodded affirmatively.

"And you are willing to become the plaything of a black sultan?"

The girl drew herself up to her full height, and turned her head away;
but she did not reply.  She feared lest her knowledge of the ruse that
M. Frecoult was playing upon the Arab might cause her to betray herself
through an insufficient display of terror and aversion.

"You can escape this fate," continued the Arab; "Mohammed Beyd will
save you," and he reached out a brown hand and seized the fingers of
her right hand in a grasp so sudden and so fierce that his brutal
passion was revealed as clearly in the act as though his lips had
confessed it in words. Jane Clayton wrenched herself from his grasp.

"You beast!" she cried.  "Leave me or I shall call M.  Frecoult."

Mohammed Beyd drew back with a scowl.  His thin, upper lip curled
upward, revealing his smooth, white teeth.

"M. Frecoult?" he jeered.  "There is no such person.  The man's name is
Werper.  He is a liar, a thief, and a murderer.  He killed his captain
in the Congo country and fled to the protection of Achmet Zek.  He led
Achmet Zek to the plunder of your home.  He followed your husband, and
planned to steal his gold from him.  He has told me that you think him
your protector, and he has played upon this to win your confidence that
it might be easier to carry you north and sell you into some black
sultan's harem.  Mohammed Beyd is your only hope," and with this
assertion to provide the captive with food for thought, the Arab
spurred forward toward the head of the column.

Jane Clayton could not know how much of Mohammed Beyd's indictment
might be true, or how much false; but at least it had the effect of
dampening her hopes and causing her to review with suspicion every past
act of the man upon whom she had been looking as her sole protector in
the midst of a world of enemies and dangers.

On the march a separate tent had been provided for the captive, and at
night it was pitched between those of Mohammed Beyd and Werper.  A
sentry was posted at the front and another at the back, and with these
precautions it had not been thought necessary to confine the prisoner
to bonds.  The evening following her interview with Mohammed Beyd, Jane
Clayton sat for some time at the opening of her tent watching the rough
activities of the camp.  She had eaten the meal that had been brought
her by Mohammed Beyd's Negro slave--a meal of cassava cakes and a
nondescript stew in which a new-killed monkey, a couple of squirrels
and the remains of a zebra, slain the previous day, were impartially
and unsavorily combined; but the one-time Baltimore belle had long
since submerged in the stern battle for existence, an estheticism which
formerly revolted at much slighter provocation.

As the girl's eyes wandered across the trampled jungle clearing,
already squalid from the presence of man, she no longer apprehended
either the nearer objects of the foreground, the uncouth men laughing
or quarreling among themselves, or the jungle beyond, which
circumscribed the extreme range of her material vision.  Her gaze
passed through all these, unseeing, to center itself upon a distant
bungalow and scenes of happy security which brought to her eyes tears
of mingled joy and sorrow.  She saw a tall, broad-shouldered man riding
in from distant fields; she saw herself waiting to greet him with an
armful of fresh-cut roses from the bushes which flanked the little
rustic gate before her.  All this was gone, vanished into the past,
wiped out by the torches and bullets and hatred of these hideous and
degenerate men.  With a stifled sob, and a little shudder, Jane Clayton
turned back into her tent and sought the pile of unclean blankets which
were her bed.  Throwing herself face downward upon them she sobbed
forth her misery until kindly sleep brought her, at least temporary,
relief.

And while she slept a figure stole from the tent that stood to the
right of hers.  It approached the sentry before the doorway and
whispered a few words in the man's ear.  The latter nodded, and strode
off through the darkness in the direction of his own blankets.  The
figure passed to the rear of Jane Clayton's tent and spoke again to the
sentry there, and this man also left, following in the trail of the
first.

Then he who had sent them away stole silently to the tent flap and
untying the fastenings entered with the noiselessness of a disembodied
spirit.




21

The Flight to the Jungle


Sleepless upon his blankets, Albert Werper let his evil mind dwell upon
the charms of the woman in the nearby tent.  He had noted Mohammed
Beyd's sudden interest in the girl, and judging the man by his own
standards, had guessed at the basis of the Arab's sudden change of
attitude toward the prisoner.

And as he let his imaginings run riot they aroused within him a bestial
jealousy of Mohammed Beyd, and a great fear that the other might
encompass his base designs upon the defenseless girl.  By a strange
process of reasoning, Werper, whose designs were identical with the
Arab's, pictured himself as Jane Clayton's protector, and presently
convinced himself that the attentions which might seem hideous to her
if proffered by Mohammed Beyd, would be welcomed from Albert Werper.

Her husband was dead, and Werper fancied that he could replace in the
girl's heart the position which had been vacated by the act of the grim
reaper.  He could offer Jane Clayton marriage--a thing which Mohammed
Beyd would not offer, and which the girl would spurn from him with as
deep disgust as she would his unholy lust.

It was not long before the Belgian had succeeded in convincing himself
that the captive not only had every reason for having conceived
sentiments of love for him; but that she had by various feminine
methods acknowledged her new-born affection.

And then a sudden resolution possessed him.  He threw the blankets from
him and rose to his feet.  Pulling on his boots and buckling his
cartridge belt and revolver about his hips he stepped to the flap of
his tent and looked out.  There was no sentry before the entrance to
the prisoner's tent!  What could it mean?  Fate was indeed playing into
his hands.

Stepping outside he passed to the rear of the girl's tent.  There was
no sentry there, either!  And now, boldly, he walked to the entrance
and stepped within.

Dimly the moonlight illumined the interior.  Across the tent a figure
bent above the blankets of a bed.  There was a whispered word, and
another figure rose from the blankets to a sitting position.  Slowly
Albert Werper's eyes were becoming accustomed to the half darkness of
the tent.  He saw that the figure leaning over the bed was that of a
man, and he guessed at the truth of the nocturnal visitor's identity.

A sullen, jealous rage enveloped him.  He took a step in the direction
of the two.  He heard a frightened cry break from the girl's lips as
she recognized the features of the man above her, and he saw Mohammed
Beyd seize her by the throat and bear her back upon the blankets.

Cheated passion cast a red blur before the eyes of the Belgian.  No!
The man should not have her.  She was for him and him alone.  He would
not be robbed of his rights.

Quickly he ran across the tent and threw himself upon the back of
Mohammed Beyd.  The latter, though surprised by this sudden and
unexpected attack, was not one to give up without a battle.  The
Belgian's fingers were feeling for his throat, but the Arab tore them
away, and rising wheeled upon his adversary.  As they faced each other
Werper struck the Arab a heavy blow in the face, sending him staggering
backward.  If he had followed up his advantage he would have had
Mohammed Beyd at his mercy in another moment; but instead he tugged at
his revolver to draw it from its holster, and Fate ordained that at
that particular moment the weapon should stick in its leather scabbard.

Before he could disengage it, Mohammed Beyd had recovered himself and
was dashing upon him.  Again Werper struck the other in the face, and
the Arab returned the blow.  Striking at each other and ceaselessly
attempting to clinch, the two battled about the small interior of the
tent, while the girl, wide-eyed in terror and astonishment, watched the
duel in frozen silence.

Again and again Werper struggled to draw his weapon.  Mohammed Beyd,
anticipating no such opposition to his base desires, had come to the
tent unarmed, except for a long knife which he now drew as he stood
panting during the first brief rest of the encounter.

"Dog of a Christian," he whispered, "look upon this knife in the hands
of Mohammed Beyd!  Look well, unbeliever, for it is the last thing in
life that you shall see or feel.  With it Mohammed Beyd will cut out
your black heart.  If you have a God pray to him now--in a minute more
you shall be dead," and with that he rushed viciously upon the Belgian,
his knife raised high above his head.

Werper was still dragging futilely at his weapon.  The Arab was almost
upon him.  In desperation the European waited until Mohammed Beyd was
all but against him, then he threw himself to one side to the floor of
the tent, leaving a leg extended in the path of the Arab.

The trick succeeded.  Mohammed Beyd, carried on by the momentum of his
charge, stumbled over the projecting obstacle and crashed to the
ground.  Instantly he was up again and wheeling to renew the battle;
but Werper was on foot ahead of him, and now his revolver, loosened
from its holster, flashed in his hand.

The Arab dove headfirst to grapple with him, there was a sharp report,
a lurid gleam of flame in the darkness, and Mohammed Beyd rolled over
and over upon the floor to come to a final rest beside the bed of the
woman he had sought to dishonor.

Almost immediately following the report came the sound of excited
voices in the camp without.  Men were calling back and forth to one
another asking the meaning of the shot.  Werper could hear them running
hither and thither, investigating.

Jane Clayton had risen to her feet as the Arab died, and now she came
forward with outstretched hands toward Werper.

"How can I ever thank you, my friend?" she asked.  "And to think that
only today I had almost believed the infamous story which this beast
told me of your perfidy and of your past.  Forgive me, M. Frecoult.  I
might have known that a white man and a gentleman could be naught else
than the protector of a woman of his own race amid the dangers of this
savage land."

Werper's hands dropped limply at his sides.  He stood looking at the
girl; but he could find no words to reply to her.  Her innocent
arraignment of his true purposes was unanswerable.

Outside, the Arabs were searching for the author of the disturbing
shot.  The two sentries who had been relieved and sent to their
blankets by Mohammed Beyd were the first to suggest going to the tent
of the prisoner.  It occurred to them that possibly the woman had
successfully defended herself against their leader.

Werper heard the men approaching.  To be apprehended as the slayer of
Mohammed Beyd would be equivalent to a sentence of immediate death.
The fierce and brutal raiders would tear to pieces a Christian who had
dared spill the blood of their leader.  He must find some excuse to
delay the finding of Mohammed Beyd's dead body.

Returning his revolver to its holster, he walked quickly to the
entrance of the tent.  Parting the flaps he stepped out and confronted
the men, who were rapidly approaching.  Somehow he found within him the
necessary bravado to force a smile to his lips, as he held up his hand
to bar their farther progress.

"The woman resisted," he said, "and Mohammed Beyd was forced to shoot
her.  She is not dead--only slightly wounded.  You may go back to your
blankets.  Mohammed Beyd and I will look after the prisoner;" then he
turned and re-entered the tent, and the raiders, satisfied by this
explanation, gladly returned to their broken slumbers.

As he again faced Jane Clayton, Werper found himself animated by quite
different intentions than those which had lured him from his blankets
but a few minutes before.  The excitement of his encounter with
Mohammed Beyd, as well as the dangers which he now faced at the hands
of the raiders when morning must inevitably reveal the truth of what
had occurred in the tent of the prisoner that night, had naturally
cooled the hot passion which had dominated him when he entered the tent.

But another and stronger force was exerting itself in the girl's favor.
However low a man may sink, honor and chivalry, has he ever possessed
them, are never entirely eradicated from his character, and though
Albert Werper had long since ceased to evidence the slightest claim to
either the one or the other, the spontaneous acknowledgment of them
which the girl's speech had presumed had reawakened them both within
him.

For the first time he realized the almost hopeless and frightful
position of the fair captive, and the depths of ignominy to which he
had sunk, that had made it possible for him, a well-born, European
gentleman, to have entertained even for a moment the part that he had
taken in the ruin of her home, happiness, and herself.

Too much of baseness already lay at the threshold of his conscience for
him ever to hope entirely to redeem himself; but in the first, sudden
burst of contrition the man conceived an honest intention to undo, in
so far as lay within his power, the evil that his criminal avarice had
brought upon this sweet and unoffending woman.

As he stood apparently listening to the retreating footsteps--Jane
Clayton approached him.

"What are we to do now?" she asked.  "Morning will bring discovery of
this," and she pointed to the still body of Mohammed Beyd.  "They will
kill you when they find him."

For a time Werper did not reply, then he turned suddenly toward the
woman.

"I have a plan," he cried.  "It will require nerve and courage on your
part; but you have already shown that you possess both.  Can you endure
still more?"

"I can endure anything," she replied with a brave smile, "that may
offer us even a slight chance for escape."

"You must simulate death," he explained, "while I carry you from the
camp.  I will explain to the sentries that Mohammed Beyd has ordered me
to take your body into the jungle.  This seemingly unnecessary act I
shall explain upon the grounds that Mohammed Beyd had conceived a
violent passion for you and that he so regretted the act by which he
had become your slayer that he could not endure the silent reproach of
your lifeless body."

The girl held up her hand to stop.  A smile touched her lips.

"Are you quite mad?" she asked.  "Do you imagine that the sentries will
credit any such ridiculous tale?"

"You do not know them," he replied.  "Beneath their rough exteriors,
despite their calloused and criminal natures, there exists in each a
well-defined strain of romantic emotionalism--you will find it among
such as these throughout the world.  It is romance which lures men to
lead wild lives of outlawry and crime.  The ruse will succeed--never
fear."

Jane Clayton shrugged.  "We can but try it--and then what?"

"I shall hide you in the jungle," continued the Belgian, "coming for
you alone and with two horses in the morning."

"But how will you explain Mohammed Beyd's death?" she asked.  "It will
be discovered before ever you can escape the camp in the morning."

"I shall not explain it," replied Werper.  "Mohammed Beyd shall explain
it himself--we must leave that to him.  Are you ready for the venture?"

"Yes."

"But wait, I must get you a weapon and ammunition," and Werper walked
quickly from the tent.

Very shortly he returned with an extra revolver and ammunition belt
strapped about his waist.

"Are you ready?" he asked.

"Quite ready," replied the girl.

"Then come and throw yourself limply across my left shoulder," and
Werper knelt to receive her.

"There," he said, as he rose to his feet.  "Now, let your arms, your
legs and your head hang limply.  Remember that you are dead."

A moment later the man walked out into the camp, the body of the woman
across his shoulder.

A thorn boma had been thrown up about the camp, to discourage the
bolder of the hungry carnivora.  A couple of sentries paced to and fro
in the light of a fire which they kept burning brightly.  The nearer of
these looked up in surprise as he saw Werper approaching.

"Who are you?" he cried.  "What have you there?"

Werper raised the hood of his burnoose that the fellow might see his
face.

"This is the body of the woman," he explained.  "Mohammed Beyd has
asked me to take it into the jungle, for he cannot bear to look upon
the face of her whom he loved, and whom necessity compelled him to
slay.  He suffers greatly--he is inconsolable.  It was with difficulty
that I prevented him taking his own life."

Across the speaker's shoulder, limp and frightened, the girl waited for
the Arab's reply.  He would laugh at this preposterous story; of that
she was sure.  In an instant he would unmask the deception that M.
Frecoult was attempting to practice upon him, and they would both be
lost.  She tried to plan how best she might aid her would-be rescuer in
the fight which must most certainly follow within a moment or two.

Then she heard the voice of the Arab as he replied to M. Frecoult.

"Are you going alone, or do you wish me to awaken someone to accompany
you?" he asked, and his tone denoted not the least surprise that
Mohammed Beyd had suddenly discovered such remarkably sensitive
characteristics.

"I shall go alone," replied Werper, and he passed on and out through
the narrow opening in the boma, by which the sentry stood.

A moment later he had entered among the boles of the trees with his
burden, and when safely hidden from the sentry's view lowered the girl
to her feet, with a low, "sh-sh," when she would have spoken.

Then he led her a little farther into the forest, halted beneath a
large tree with spreading branches, buckled a cartridge belt and
revolver about her waist, and assisted her to clamber into the lower
branches.

"Tomorrow," he whispered, "as soon as I can elude them, I will return
for you.  Be brave, Lady Greystoke--we may yet escape."

"Thank you," she replied in a low tone.  "You have been very kind, and
very brave."

Werper did not reply, and the darkness of the night hid the scarlet
flush of shame which swept upward across his face.  Quickly he turned
and made his way back to camp.  The sentry, from his post, saw him
enter his own tent; but he did not see him crawl under the canvas at
the rear and sneak cautiously to the tent which the prisoner had
occupied, where now lay the dead body of Mohammed Beyd.

Raising the lower edge of the rear wall, Werper crept within and
approached the corpse.  Without an instant's hesitation he seized the
dead wrists and dragged the body upon its back to the point where he
had just entered.  On hands and knees he backed out as he had come in,
drawing the corpse after him.  Once outside the Belgian crept to the
side of the tent and surveyed as much of the camp as lay within his
vision--no one was watching.

Returning to the body, he lifted it to his shoulder, and risking all on
a quick sally, ran swiftly across the narrow opening which separated
the prisoner's tent from that of the dead man.  Behind the silken wall
he halted and lowered his burden to the ground, and there he remained
motionless for several minutes, listening.

Satisfied, at last, that no one had seen him, he stooped and raised the
bottom of the tent wall, backed in and dragged the thing that had been
Mohammed Beyd after him.  To the sleeping rugs of the dead raider he
drew the corpse, then he fumbled about in the darkness until he had
found Mohammed Beyd's revolver.  With the weapon in his hand he
returned to the side of the dead man, kneeled beside the bedding, and
inserted his right hand with the weapon beneath the rugs, piled a
number of thicknesses of the closely woven fabric over and about the
revolver with his left hand.  Then he pulled the trigger, and at the
same time he coughed.

The muffled report could not have been heard above the sound of his
cough by one directly outside the tent.  Werper was satisfied.  A grim
smile touched his lips as he withdrew the weapon from the rugs and
placed it carefully in the right hand of the dead man, fixing three of
the fingers around the grip and the index finger inside the trigger
guard.

A moment longer he tarried to rearrange the disordered rugs, and then
he left as he had entered, fastening down the rear wall of the tent as
it had been before he had raised it.

Going to the tent of the prisoner he removed there also the evidence
that someone might have come or gone beneath the rear wall.  Then he
returned to his own tent, entered, fastened down the canvas, and
crawled into his blankets.

The following morning he was awakened by the excited voice of Mohammed
Beyd's slave calling to him at the entrance of his tent.

"Quick!  Quick!" cried the black in a frightened tone.  "Come!
Mohammed Beyd is dead in his tent--dead by his own hand."

Werper sat up quickly in his blankets at the first alarm, a startled
expression upon his countenance; but at the last words of the black a
sigh of relief escaped his lips and a slight smile replaced the tense
lines upon his face.

"I come," he called to the slave, and drawing on his boots, rose and
went out of his tent.

Excited Arabs and blacks were running from all parts of the camp toward
the silken tent of Mohammed Beyd, and when Werper entered he found a
number of the raiders crowded about the corpse, now cold and stiff.

Shouldering his way among them, the Belgian halted beside the dead body
of the raider.  He looked down in silence for a moment upon the still
face, then he wheeled upon the Arabs.

"Who has done this thing?" he cried.  His tone was both menacing and
accusing.  "Who has murdered Mohammed Beyd?"

A sudden chorus of voices arose in tumultuous protest.

"Mohammed Beyd was not murdered," they cried.  "He died by his own
hand.  This, and Allah, are our witnesses," and they pointed to a
revolver in the dead man's hand.

For a time Werper pretended to be skeptical; but at last permitted
himself to be convinced that Mohammed Beyd had indeed killed himself in
remorse for the death of the white woman he had, all unknown to his
followers, loved so devotedly.

Werper himself wrapped the blankets of the dead man about the corpse,
taking care to fold inward the scorched and bullet-torn fabric that had
muffled the report of the weapon he had fired the night before.  Then
six husky blacks carried the body out into the clearing where the camp
stood, and deposited it in a shallow grave.  As the loose earth fell
upon the silent form beneath the tell-tale blankets, Albert Werper
heaved another sigh of relief--his plan had worked out even better than
he had dared hope.

With Achmet Zek and Mohammed Beyd both dead, the raiders were without a
leader, and after a brief conference they decided to return into the
north on visits to the various tribes to which they belonged. Werper,
after learning the direction they intended taking, announced that for
his part, he was going east to the coast, and as they knew of nothing
he possessed which any of them coveted, they signified their
willingness that he should go his way.

As they rode off, he sat his horse in the center of the clearing
watching them disappear one by one into the jungle, and thanked his God
that he had at last escaped their villainous clutches.

When he could no longer hear any sound of them, he turned to the right
and rode into the forest toward the tree where he had hidden Lady
Greystoke, and drawing rein beneath it, called up in a gay and hopeful
voice a pleasant, "Good morning!"

There was no reply, and though his eyes searched the thick foliage
above him, he could see no sign of the girl.  Dismounting, he quickly
climbed into the tree, where he could obtain a view of all its
branches.  The tree was empty--Jane Clayton had vanished during the
silent watches of the jungle night.




22

Tarzan Recovers His Reason


As Tarzan let the pebbles from the recovered pouch run through his
fingers, his thoughts returned to the pile of yellow ingots about which
the Arabs and the Abyssinians had waged their relentless battle.

What was there in common between that pile of dirty metal and the
beautiful, sparkling pebbles that had formerly been in his pouch?  What
was the metal?  From whence had it come?  What was that tantalizing
half-conviction which seemed to demand the recognition of his memory
that the yellow pile for which these men had fought and died had been
intimately connected with his past--that it had been his?

What had been his past?  He shook his head.  Vaguely the memory of his
apish childhood passed slowly in review--then came a strangely tangled
mass of faces, figures and events which seemed to have no relation to
Tarzan of the Apes, and yet which were, even in their fragmentary form,
familiar.

Slowly and painfully, recollection was attempting to reassert itself,
the hurt brain was mending, as the cause of its recent failure to
function was being slowly absorbed or removed by the healing processes
of perfect circulation.

The people who now passed before his mind's eye for the first time in
weeks wore familiar faces; but yet he could neither place them in the
niches they had once filled in his past life, nor call them by name.
One was a fair she, and it was her face which most often moved through
the tangled recollections of his convalescing brain.  Who was she?
What had she been to Tarzan of the Apes?  He seemed to see her about
the very spot upon which the pile of gold had been unearthed by the
Abyssinians; but the surroundings were vastly different from those
which now obtained.

There was a building--there were many buildings--and there were hedges,
fences, and flowers.  Tarzan puckered his brow in puzzled study of the
wonderful problem.  For an instant he seemed to grasp the whole of a
true explanation, and then, just as success was within his grasp, the
picture faded into a jungle scene where a naked, white youth danced in
company with a band of hairy, primordial ape-things.

Tarzan shook his head and sighed.  Why was it that he could not
recollect?  At least he was sure that in some way the pile of gold, the
place where it lay, the subtle aroma of the elusive she he had been
pursuing, the memory figure of the white woman, and he himself, were
inextricably connected by the ties of a forgotten past.

If the woman belonged there, what better place to search or await her
than the very spot which his broken recollections seemed to assign to
her?  It was worth trying.  Tarzan slipped the thong of the empty pouch
over his shoulder and started off through the trees in the direction of
the plain.

At the outskirts of the forest he met the Arabs returning in search of
Achmet Zek.  Hiding, he let them pass, and then resumed his way toward
the charred ruins of the home he had been almost upon the point of
recalling to his memory.

His journey across the plain was interrupted by the discovery of a
small herd of antelope in a little swale, where the cover and the wind
were well combined to make stalking easy.  A fat yearling rewarded a
half hour of stealthy creeping and a sudden, savage rush, and it was
late in the afternoon when the ape-man settled himself upon his
haunches beside his kill to enjoy the fruits of his skill, his cunning,
and his prowess.

His hunger satisfied, thirst next claimed his attention.  The river
lured him by the shortest path toward its refreshing waters, and when
he had drunk, night already had fallen and he was some half mile or
more down stream from the point where he had seen the pile of yellow
ingots, and where he hoped to meet the memory woman, or find some clew
to her whereabouts or her identity.

To the jungle bred, time is usually a matter of small moment, and
haste, except when engendered by terror, by rage, or by hunger, is
distasteful.  Today was gone.  Therefore tomorrow, of which there was
an infinite procession, would answer admirably for Tarzan's further
quest.  And, besides, the ape-man was tired and would sleep.

A tree afforded him the safety, seclusion and comforts of a
well-appointed bedchamber, and to the chorus of the hunters and the
hunted of the wild river bank he soon dropped off into deep slumber.

Morning found him both hungry and thirsty again, and dropping from his
tree he made his way to the drinking place at the river's edge.  There
he found Numa, the lion, ahead of him.  The big fellow was lapping the
water greedily, and at the approach of Tarzan along the trail in his
rear, he raised his head, and turning his gaze backward across his
maned shoulders glared at the intruder.  A low growl of warning rumbled
from his throat; but Tarzan, guessing that the beast had but just
quitted his kill and was well filled, merely made a slight detour and
continued to the river, where he stopped a few yards above the tawny
cat, and dropping upon his hands and knees plunged his face into the
cool water.  For a moment the lion continued to eye the man; then he
resumed his drinking, and man and beast quenched their thirst side by
side each apparently oblivious of the other's presence.

Numa was the first to finish.  Raising his head, he gazed across the
river for a few minutes with that stony fixity of attention which is a
characteristic of his kind.  But for the ruffling of his black mane to
the touch of the passing breeze he might have been wrought from golden
bronze, so motionless, so statuesque his pose.

A deep sigh from the cavernous lungs dispelled the illusion.  The
mighty head swung slowly around until the yellow eyes rested upon the
man.  The bristled lip curved upward, exposing yellow fangs.  Another
warning growl vibrated the heavy jowls, and the king of beasts turned
majestically about and paced slowly up the trail into the dense reeds.

Tarzan of the Apes drank on, but from the corners of his gray eyes he
watched the great brute's every move until he had disappeared from
view, and, after, his keen ears marked the movements of the carnivore.

A plunge in the river was followed by a scant breakfast of eggs which
chance discovered to him, and then he set off up river toward the ruins
of the bungalow where the golden ingots had marked the center of
yesterday's battle.

And when he came upon the spot, great was his surprise and
consternation, for the yellow metal had disappeared.  The earth,
trampled by the feet of horses and men, gave no clew.  It was as though
the ingots had evaporated into thin air.

The ape-man was at a loss to know where to turn or what next to do.
There was no sign of any spoor which might denote that the she had been
here.  The metal was gone, and if there was any connection between the
she and the metal it seemed useless to wait for her now that the latter
had been removed elsewhere.

Everything seemed to elude him--the pretty pebbles, the yellow metal,
the she, his memory.  Tarzan was disgusted.  He would go back into the
jungle and look for Chulk, and so he turned his steps once more toward
the forest.  He moved rapidly, swinging across the plain in a long,
easy trot, and at the edge of the forest, taking to the trees with the
agility and speed of a small monkey.

His direction was aimless--he merely raced on and on through the
jungle, the joy of unfettered action his principal urge, with the hope
of stumbling upon some clew to Chulk or the she, a secondary incentive.

For two days he roamed about, killing, eating, drinking and sleeping
wherever inclination and the means to indulge it occurred
simultaneously.  It was upon the morning of the third day that the
scent spoor of horse and man were wafted faintly to his nostrils.
Instantly he altered his course to glide silently through the branches
in the direction from which the scent came.

It was not long before he came upon a solitary horseman riding toward
the east.  Instantly his eyes confirmed what his nose had previously
suspected--the rider was he who had stolen his pretty pebbles.  The
light of rage flared suddenly in the gray eyes as the ape-man dropped
lower among the branches until he moved almost directly above the
unconscious Werper.

There was a quick leap, and the Belgian felt a heavy body hurtle onto
the rump of his terror-stricken mount.  The horse, snorting, leaped
forward.  Giant arms encircled the rider, and in the twinkling of an
eye he was dragged from his saddle to find himself lying in the narrow
trail with a naked, white giant kneeling upon his breast.

Recognition came to Werper with the first glance at his captor's face,
and a pallor of fear overspread his features.  Strong fingers were at
his throat, fingers of steel.  He tried to cry out, to plead for his
life; but the cruel fingers denied him speech, as they were as surely
denying him life.

"The pretty pebbles?" cried the man upon his breast.  "What did you
with the pretty pebbles--with Tarzan's pretty pebbles?"

The fingers relaxed to permit a reply.  For some time Werper could only
choke and cough--at last he regained the powers of speech.

"Achmet Zek, the Arab, stole them from me," he cried; "he made me give
up the pouch and the pebbles."

"I saw all that," replied Tarzan; "but the pebbles in the pouch were
not the pebbles of Tarzan--they were only such pebbles as fill the
bottoms of the rivers, and the shelving banks beside them.  Even the
Arab would not have them, for he threw them away in anger when he had
looked upon them.  It is my pretty pebbles that I want--where are they?"

"I do not know, I do not know," cried Werper.  "I gave them to Achmet
Zek or he would have killed me.  A few minutes later he followed me
along the trail to slay me, although he had promised to molest me no
further, and I shot and killed him; but the pouch was not upon his
person and though I searched about the jungle for some time I could not
find it."

"I found it, I tell you," growled Tarzan, "and I also found the pebbles
which Achmet Zek had thrown away in disgust.  They were not Tarzan's
pebbles.  You have hidden them!  Tell me where they are or I will kill
you," and the brown fingers of the ape-man closed a little tighter upon
the throat of his victim.

Werper struggled to free himself.  "My God, Lord Greystoke," he managed
to scream, "would you commit murder for a handful of stones?"

The fingers at his throat relaxed, a puzzled, far-away expression
softened the gray eyes.

"Lord Greystoke!" repeated the ape-man.  "Lord Greystoke!  Who is Lord
Greystoke?  Where have I heard that name before?"

"Why man, you are Lord Greystoke," cried the Belgian.  "You were
injured by a falling rock when the earthquake shattered the passage to
the underground chamber to which you and your black Waziri had come to
fetch golden ingots back to your bungalow.  The blow shattered your
memory.  You are John Clayton, Lord Greystoke--don't you remember?"

"John Clayton, Lord Greystoke!" repeated Tarzan.  Then for a moment he
was silent.  Presently his hand went falteringly to his forehead, an
expression of wonderment filled his eyes--of wonderment and sudden
understanding.  The forgotten name had reawakened the returning memory
that had been struggling to reassert itself.  The ape-man relinquished
his grasp upon the throat of the Belgian, and leaped to his feet.

"God!" he cried, and then, "Jane!" Suddenly he turned toward Werper.
"My wife?" he asked.  "What has become of her?  The farm is in ruins.
You know.  You have had something to do with all this.  You followed me
to Opar, you stole the jewels which I thought but pretty pebbles.  You
are a crook!  Do not try to tell me that you are not."

"He is worse than a crook," said a quiet voice close behind them.

Tarzan turned in astonishment to see a tall man in uniform standing in
the trail a few paces from him.  Back of the man were a number of black
soldiers in the uniform of the Congo Free State.

"He is a murderer, Monsieur," continued the officer.  "I have followed
him for a long time to take him back to stand trial for the killing of
his superior officer."

Werper was upon his feet now, gazing, white and trembling, at the fate
which had overtaken him even in the fastness of the labyrinthine
jungle.  Instinctively he turned to flee; but Tarzan of the Apes
reached out a strong hand and grasped him by the shoulder.

"Wait!" said the ape-man to his captive.  "This gentleman wishes you,
and so do I. When I am through with you, he may have you.  Tell me what
has become of my wife."

The Belgian officer eyed the almost naked, white giant with curiosity.
He noted the strange contrast of primitive weapons and apparel, and the
easy, fluent French which the man spoke.  The former denoted the
lowest, the latter the highest type of culture.  He could not quite
determine the social status of this strange creature; but he knew that
he did not relish the easy assurance with which the fellow presumed to
dictate when he might take possession of the prisoner.

"Pardon me," he said, stepping forward and placing his hand on Werper's
other shoulder; "but this gentleman is my prisoner.  He must come with
me."

"When I am through with him," replied Tarzan, quietly.

The officer turned and beckoned to the soldiers standing in the trail
behind him.  A company of uniformed blacks stepped quickly forward and
pushing past the three, surrounded the ape-man and his captive.

"Both the law and the power to enforce it are upon my side," announced
the officer.  "Let us have no trouble.  If you have a grievance against
this man you may return with me and enter your charge regularly before
an authorized tribunal."

"Your legal rights are not above suspicion, my friend," replied Tarzan,
"and your power to enforce your commands are only apparent--not real.
You have presumed to enter British territory with an armed force.
Where is your authority for this invasion?  Where are the extradition
papers which warrant the arrest of this man?  And what assurance have
you that I cannot bring an armed force about you that will prevent your
return to the Congo Free State?"

The Belgian lost his temper.  "I have no disposition to argue with a
naked savage," he cried.  "Unless you wish to be hurt you will not
interfere with me.  Take the prisoner, Sergeant!"

Werper raised his lips close to Tarzan's ear.  "Keep me from them, and
I can show you the very spot where I saw your wife last night," he
whispered.  "She cannot be far from here at this very minute."

The soldiers, following the signal from their sergeant, closed in to
seize Werper.  Tarzan grabbed the Belgian about the waist, and bearing
him beneath his arm as he might have borne a sack of flour, leaped
forward in an attempt to break through the cordon.  His right fist
caught the nearest soldier upon the jaw and sent him hurtling backward
upon his fellows.  Clubbed rifles were torn from the hands of those who
barred his way, and right and left the black soldiers stumbled aside in
the face of the ape-man's savage break for liberty.

So completely did the blacks surround the two that they dared not fire
for fear of hitting one of their own number, and Tarzan was already
through them and upon the point of dodging into the concealing mazes of
the jungle when one who had sneaked upon him from behind struck him a
heavy blow upon the head with a rifle.

In an instant the ape-man was down and a dozen black soldiers were upon
his back.  When he regained consciousness he found himself securely
bound, as was Werper also.  The Belgian officer, success having crowned
his efforts, was in good humor, and inclined to chaff his prisoners
about the ease with which they had been captured; but from Tarzan of
the Apes he elicited no response.  Werper, however, was voluble in his
protests.  He explained that Tarzan was an English lord; but the
officer only laughed at the assertion, and advised his prisoner to save
his breath for his defense in court.

As soon as Tarzan regained his senses and it was found that he was not
seriously injured, the prisoners were hastened into line and the return
march toward the Congo Free State boundary commenced.

Toward evening the column halted beside a stream, made camp and
prepared the evening meal.  From the thick foliage of the nearby jungle
a pair of fierce eyes watched the activities of the uniformed blacks
with silent intensity and curiosity.  From beneath beetling brows the
creature saw the boma constructed, the fires built, and the supper
prepared.

Tarzan and Werper had been lying bound behind a small pile of knapsacks
from the time that the company had halted; but with the preparation of
the meal completed, their guard ordered them to rise and come forward
to one of the fires where their hands would be unfettered that they
might eat.

As the giant ape-man rose, a startled expression of recognition entered
the eyes of the watcher in the jungle, and a low guttural broke from
the savage lips.  Instantly Tarzan was alert, but the answering growl
died upon his lips, suppressed by the fear that it might arouse the
suspicions of the soldiers.

Suddenly an inspiration came to him.  He turned toward Werper.

"I am going to speak to you in a loud voice and in a tongue which you
do not understand.  Appear to listen intently to what I say, and
occasionally mumble something as though replying in the same
language--our escape may hinge upon the success of your efforts."

Werper nodded in assent and understanding, and immediately there broke
from the lips of his companion a strange jargon which might have been
compared with equal propriety to the barking and growling of a dog and
the chattering of monkeys.

The nearer soldiers looked in surprise at the ape-man.  Some of them
laughed, while others drew away in evident superstitious fear.  The
officer approached the prisoners while Tarzan was still jabbering, and
halted behind them, listening in perplexed interest.  When Werper
mumbled some ridiculous jargon in reply his curiosity broke bounds, and
he stepped forward, demanding to know what language it was that they
spoke.

Tarzan had gauged the measure of the man's culture from the nature and
quality of his conversation during the march, and he rested the success
of his reply upon the estimate he had made.

"Greek," he explained.

"Oh, I thought it was Greek," replied the officer; "but it has been so
many years since I studied it that I was not sure.  In future, however,
I will thank you to speak in a language which I am more familiar with."

Werper turned his head to hide a grin, whispering to Tarzan: "It was
Greek to him all right--and to me, too."

But one of the black soldiers mumbled in a low voice to a companion: "I
have heard those sounds before--once at night when I was lost in the
jungle, I heard the hairy men of the trees talking among themselves,
and their words were like the words of this white man.  I wish that we
had not found him.  He is not a man at all--he is a bad spirit, and we
shall have bad luck if we do not let him go," and the fellow rolled his
eyes fearfully toward the jungle.

His companion laughed nervously, and moved away, to repeat the
conversation, with variations and exaggerations, to others of the black
soldiery, so that it was not long before a frightful tale of black
magic and sudden death was woven about the giant prisoner, and had gone
the rounds of the camp.

And deep in the gloomy jungle amidst the darkening shadows of the
falling night a hairy, manlike creature swung swiftly southward upon
some secret mission of his own.




23

A Night of Terror


To Jane Clayton, waiting in the tree where Werper had placed her, it
seemed that the long night would never end, yet end it did at last, and
within an hour of the coming of dawn her spirits leaped with renewed
hope at sight of a solitary horseman approaching along the trail.

The flowing burnoose, with its loose hood, hid both the face and the
figure of the rider; but that it was M.  Frecoult the girl well knew,
since he had been garbed as an Arab, and he alone might be expected to
seek her hiding place.

That which she saw relieved the strain of the long night vigil; but
there was much that she did not see.  She did not see the black face
beneath the white hood, nor the file of ebon horsemen beyond the
trail's bend riding slowly in the wake of their leader.  These things
she did not see at first, and so she leaned downward toward the
approaching rider, a cry of welcome forming in her throat.

At the first word the man looked up, reining in in surprise, and as she
saw the black face of Abdul Mourak, the Abyssinian, she shrank back in
terror among the branches; but it was too late.  The man had seen her,
and now he called to her to descend.  At first she refused; but when a
dozen black cavalrymen drew up behind their leader, and at Abdul
Mourak's command one of them started to climb the tree after her she
realized that resistance was futile, and came slowly down to stand upon
the ground before this new captor and plead her cause in the name of
justice and humanity.

Angered by recent defeat, and by the loss of the gold, the jewels, and
his prisoners, Abdul Mourak was in no mood to be influenced by any
appeal to those softer sentiments to which, as a matter of fact, he was
almost a stranger even under the most favourable conditions.

He looked for degradation and possible death in punishment for his
failures and his misfortunes when he should have returned to his native
land and made his report to Menelek; but an acceptable gift might
temper the wrath of the emperor, and surely this fair flower of another
race should be gratefully received by the black ruler!

When Jane Clayton had concluded her appeal, Abdul Mourak replied
briefly that he would promise her protection; but that he must take her
to his emperor.  The girl did not need ask him why, and once again hope
died within her breast.  Resignedly she permitted herself to be lifted
to a seat behind one of the troopers, and again, under new masters, her
journey was resumed toward what she now began to believe was her
inevitable fate.

Abdul Mourak, bereft of his guides by the battle he had waged against
the raiders, and himself unfamiliar with the country, had wandered far
from the trail he should have followed, and as a result had made but
little progress toward the north since the beginning of his flight.
Today he was beating toward the west in the hope of coming upon a
village where he might obtain guides; but night found him still as far
from a realization of his hopes as had the rising sun.

It was a dispirited company which went into camp, waterless and hungry,
in the dense jungle.  Attracted by the horses, lions roared about the
boma, and to their hideous din was added the shrill neighs of the
terror-stricken beasts they hunted.  There was little sleep for man or
beast, and the sentries were doubled that there might be enough on duty
both to guard against the sudden charge of an overbold, or overhungry
lion, and to keep the fire blazing which was an even more effectual
barrier against them than the thorny boma.

It was well past midnight, and as yet Jane Clayton, notwithstanding
that she had passed a sleepless night the night before, had scarcely
more than dozed.  A sense of impending danger seemed to hang like a
black pall over the camp.  The veteran troopers of the black emperor
were nervous and ill at ease.  Abdul Mourak left his blankets a dozen
times to pace restlessly back and forth between the tethered horses and
the crackling fire.  The girl could see his great frame silhouetted
against the lurid glare of the flames, and she guessed from the quick,
nervous movements of the man that he was afraid.

The roaring of the lions rose in sudden fury until the earth trembled
to the hideous chorus.  The horses shrilled their neighs of terror as
they lay back upon their halter ropes in their mad endeavors to break
loose.  A trooper, braver than his fellows, leaped among the kicking,
plunging, fear-maddened beasts in a futile attempt to quiet them.  A
lion, large, and fierce, and courageous, leaped almost to the boma,
full in the bright light from the fire.  A sentry raised his piece and
fired, and the little leaden pellet unstoppered the vials of hell upon
the terror-stricken camp.

The shot ploughed a deep and painful furrow in the lion's side,
arousing all the bestial fury of the little brain; but abating not a
whit the power and vigor of the great body.

Unwounded, the boma and the flames might have turned him back; but now
the pain and the rage wiped caution from his mind, and with a loud, and
angry roar he topped the barrier with an easy leap and was among the
horses.

What had been pandemonium before became now an indescribable tumult of
hideous sound.  The stricken horse upon which the lion leaped shrieked
out its terror and its agony.  Several about it broke their tethers and
plunged madly about the camp.  Men leaped from their blankets and with
guns ready ran toward the picket line, and then from the jungle beyond
the boma a dozen lions, emboldened by the example of their fellow
charged fearlessly upon the camp.

Singly and in twos and threes they leaped the boma, until the little
enclosure was filled with cursing men and screaming horses battling for
their lives with the green-eyed devils of the jungle.

With the charge of the first lion, Jane Clayton had scrambled to her
feet, and now she stood horror-struck at the scene of savage slaughter
that swirled and eddied about her.  Once a bolting horse knocked her
down, and a moment later a lion, leaping in pursuit of another
terror-stricken animal, brushed her so closely that she was again
thrown from her feet.

Amidst the cracking of the rifles and the growls of the carnivora rose
the death screams of stricken men and horses as they were dragged down
by the blood-mad cats.  The leaping carnivora and the plunging horses,
prevented any concerted action by the Abyssinians--it was every man for
himself--and in the melee, the defenseless woman was either forgotten
or ignored by her black captors.  A score of times was her life menaced
by charging lions, by plunging horses, or by the wildly fired bullets
of the frightened troopers, yet there was no chance of escape, for now
with the fiendish cunning of their kind, the tawny hunters commenced to
circle about their prey, hemming them within a ring of mighty, yellow
fangs, and sharp, long talons.  Again and again an individual lion
would dash suddenly among the frightened men and horses, and
occasionally a horse, goaded to frenzy by pain or terror, succeeded in
racing safely through the circling lions, leaping the boma, and
escaping into the jungle; but for the men and the woman no such escape
was possible.

A horse, struck by a stray bullet, fell beside Jane Clayton, a lion
leaped across the expiring beast full upon the breast of a black
trooper just beyond.  The man clubbed his rifle and struck futilely at
the broad head, and then he was down and the carnivore was standing
above him.

Shrieking out his terror, the soldier clawed with puny fingers at the
shaggy breast in vain endeavor to push away the grinning jaws.  The
lion lowered his head, the gaping fangs closed with a single sickening
crunch upon the fear-distorted face, and turning strode back across the
body of the dead horse dragging his limp and bloody burden with him.

Wide-eyed the girl stood watching.  She saw the carnivore step upon the
corpse, stumblingly, as the grisly thing swung between its forepaws,
and her eyes remained fixed in fascination while the beast passed
within a few paces of her.

The interference of the body seemed to enrage the lion.  He shook the
inanimate clay venomously.  He growled and roared hideously at the
dead, insensate thing, and then he dropped it and raised his head to
look about in search of some living victim upon which to wreak his ill
temper.  His yellow eyes fastened themselves balefully upon the figure
of the girl, the bristling lips raised, disclosing the grinning fangs.
A terrific roar broke from the savage throat, and the great beast
crouched to spring upon this new and helpless victim.

Quiet had fallen early upon the camp where Tarzan and Werper lay
securely bound.  Two nervous sentries paced their beats, their eyes
rolling often toward the impenetrable shadows of the gloomy jungle.
The others slept or tried to sleep--all but the ape-man.  Silently and
powerfully he strained at the bonds which fettered his wrists.

The muscles knotted beneath the smooth, brown skin of his arms and
shoulders, the veins stood out upon his temples from the force of his
exertions--a strand parted, another and another, and one hand was free.
Then from the jungle came a low guttural, and the ape-man became
suddenly a silent, rigid statue, with ears and nostrils straining to
span the black void where his eyesight could not reach.

Again came the uncanny sound from the thick verdure beyond the camp.  A
sentry halted abruptly, straining his eyes into the gloom.  The kinky
wool upon his head stiffened and raised.  He called to his comrade in a
hoarse whisper.

"Did you hear it?" he asked.

The other came closer, trembling.

"Hear what?"

Again was the weird sound repeated, followed almost immediately by a
similar and answering sound from the camp.  The sentries drew close
together, watching the black spot from which the voice seemed to come.

Trees overhung the boma at this point which was upon the opposite side
of the camp from them.  They dared not approach.  Their terror even
prevented them from arousing their fellows--they could only stand in
frozen fear and watch for the fearsome apparition they momentarily
expected to see leap from the jungle.

Nor had they long to wait.  A dim, bulky form dropped lightly from the
branches of a tree into the camp.  At sight of it one of the sentries
recovered command of his muscles and his voice.  Screaming loudly to
awaken the sleeping camp, he leaped toward the flickering watch fire
and threw a mass of brush upon it.

The white officer and the black soldiers sprang from their blankets.
The flames leaped high upon the rejuvenated fire, lighting the entire
camp, and the awakened men shrank back in superstitious terror from the
sight that met their frightened and astonished vision.

A dozen huge and hairy forms loomed large beneath the trees at the far
side of the enclosure.  The white giant, one hand freed, had struggled
to his knees and was calling to the frightful, nocturnal visitors in a
hideous medley of bestial gutturals, barkings and growlings.

Werper had managed to sit up.  He, too, saw the savage faces of the
approaching anthropoids and scarcely knew whether to be relieved or
terror-stricken.

Growling, the great apes leaped forward toward Tarzan and Werper.
Chulk led them.  The Belgian officer called to his men to fire upon the
intruders; but the Negroes held back, filled as they were with
superstitious terror of the hairy treemen, and with the conviction that
the white giant who could thus summon the beasts of the jungle to his
aid was more than human.

Drawing his own weapon, the officer fired, and Tarzan fearing the
effect of the noise upon his really timid friends called to them to
hasten and fulfill his commands.

A couple of the apes turned and fled at the sound of the firearm; but
Chulk and a half dozen others waddled rapidly forward, and, following
the ape-man's directions, seized both him and Werper and bore them off
toward the jungle.

By dint of threats, reproaches and profanity the Belgian officer
succeeded in persuading his trembling command to fire a volley after
the retreating apes.  A ragged, straggling volley it was, but at least
one of its bullets found a mark, for as the jungle closed about the
hairy rescuers, Chulk, who bore Werper across one broad shoulder,
staggered and fell.

In an instant he was up again; but the Belgian guessed from his
unsteady gait that he was hard hit.  He lagged far behind the others,
and it was several minutes after they had halted at Tarzan's command
before he came slowly up to them, reeling from side to side, and at
last falling again beneath the weight of his burden and the shock of
his wound.

As Chulk went down he dropped Werper, so that the latter fell face
downward with the body of the ape lying half across him.  In this
position the Belgian felt something resting against his hands, which
were still bound at his back--something that was not a part of the
hairy body of the ape.

Mechanically the man's fingers felt of the object resting almost in
their grasp--it was a soft pouch, filled with small, hard particles.
Werper gasped in wonderment as recognition filtered through the
incredulity of his mind.  It was impossible, and yet--it was true!

Feverishly he strove to remove the pouch from the ape and transfer it
to his own possession; but the restricted radius to which his bonds
held his hands prevented this, though he did succeed in tucking the
pouch with its precious contents inside the waist band of his trousers.

Tarzan, sitting at a short distance, was busy with the remaining knots
of the cords which bound him.  Presently he flung aside the last of
them and rose to his feet.  Approaching Werper he knelt beside him.
For a moment he examined the ape.

"Quite dead," he announced.  "It is too bad--he was a splendid
creature," and then he turned to the work of liberating the Belgian.

He freed his hands first, and then commenced upon the knots at his
ankles.

"I can do the rest," said the Belgian.  "I have a small pocketknife
which they overlooked when they searched me," and in this way he
succeeded in ridding himself of the ape-man's attentions that he might
find and open his little knife and cut the thong which fastened the
pouch about Chulk's shoulder, and transfer it from his waist band to
the breast of his shirt.  Then he rose and approached Tarzan.

Once again had avarice claimed him.  Forgotten were the good intentions
which the confidence of Jane Clayton in his honor had awakened.  What
she had done, the little pouch had undone.  How it had come upon the
person of the great ape, Werper could not imagine, unless it had been
that the anthropoid had witnessed his fight with Achmet Zek, seen the
Arab with the pouch and taken it away from him; but that this pouch
contained the jewels of Opar, Werper was positive, and that was all
that interested him greatly.

"Now," said the ape-man, "keep your promise to me.  Lead me to the spot
where you last saw my wife."

It was slow work pushing through the jungle in the dead of night behind
the slow-moving Belgian.  The ape-man chafed at the delay, but the
European could not swing through the trees as could his more agile and
muscular companions, and so the speed of all was limited to that of the
slowest.

The apes trailed out behind the two white men for a matter of a few
miles; but presently their interest lagged, the foremost of them halted
in a little glade and the others stopped at his side.  There they sat
peering from beneath their shaggy brows at the figures of the two men
forging steadily ahead, until the latter disappeared in the leafy trail
beyond the clearing.  Then an ape sought a comfortable couch beneath a
tree, and one by one the others followed his example, so that Werper
and Tarzan continued their journey alone; nor was the latter either
surprised or concerned.

The two had gone but a short distance beyond the glade where the apes
had deserted them, when the roaring of distant lions fell upon their
ears.  The ape-man paid no attention to the familiar sounds until the
crack of a rifle came faintly from the same direction, and when this
was followed by the shrill neighing of horses, and an almost continuous
fusillade of shots intermingled with increased and savage roaring of a
large troop of lions, he became immediately concerned.

"Someone is having trouble over there," he said, turning toward Werper.
"I'll have to go to them--they may be friends."

"Your wife might be among them," suggested the Belgian, for since he
had again come into possession of the pouch he had become fearful and
suspicious of the ape-man, and in his mind had constantly revolved many
plans for eluding this giant Englishman, who was at once his savior and
his captor.

At the suggestion Tarzan started as though struck with a whip.

"God!" he cried, "she might be, and the lions are attacking them--they
are in the camp.  I can tell from the screams of the horses--and there!
that was the cry of a man in his death agonies.  Stay here man--I will
come back for you.  I must go first to them," and swinging into a tree
the lithe figure swung rapidly off into the night with the speed and
silence of a disembodied spirit.

For a moment Werper stood where the ape-man had left him.  Then a
cunning smile crossed his lips.  "Stay here?" he asked himself.  "Stay
here and wait until you return to find and take these jewels from me?
Not I, my friend, not I," and turning abruptly eastward Albert Werper
passed through the foliage of a hanging vine and out of the sight of
his fellow-man--forever.




24

Home


As Tarzan of the Apes hurtled through the trees the discordant sounds
of the battle between the Abyssinians and the lions smote more and more
distinctly upon his sensitive ears, redoubling his assurance that the
plight of the human element of the conflict was critical indeed.

At last the glare of the camp fire shone plainly through the
intervening trees, and a moment later the giant figure of the ape-man
paused upon an overhanging bough to look down upon the bloody scene of
carnage below.

His quick eye took in the whole scene with a single comprehending
glance and stopped upon the figure of a woman standing facing a great
lion across the carcass of a horse.

The carnivore was crouching to spring as Tarzan discovered the tragic
tableau.  Numa was almost beneath the branch upon which the ape-man
stood, naked and unarmed.  There was not even an instant's hesitation
upon the part of the latter--it was as though he had not even paused in
his swift progress through the trees, so lightning-like his survey and
comprehension of the scene below him--so instantaneous his consequent
action.

So hopeless had seemed her situation to her that Jane Clayton but stood
in lethargic apathy awaiting the impact of the huge body that would
hurl her to the ground--awaiting the momentary agony that cruel talons
and grisly fangs may inflict before the coming of the merciful oblivion
which would end her sorrow and her suffering.

What use to attempt escape?  As well face the hideous end as to be
dragged down from behind in futile flight.  She did not even close her
eyes to shut out the frightful aspect of that snarling face, and so it
was that as she saw the lion preparing to charge she saw, too, a
bronzed and mighty figure leap from an overhanging tree at the instant
that Numa rose in his spring.

Wide went her eyes in wonder and incredulity, as she beheld this
seeming apparition risen from the dead.  The lion was forgotten--her
own peril--everything save the wondrous miracle of this strange
recrudescence.  With parted lips, with palms tight pressed against her
heaving bosom, the girl leaned forward, large-eyed, enthralled by the
vision of her dead mate.

She saw the sinewy form leap to the shoulder of the lion, hurtling
against the leaping beast like a huge, animate battering ram.  She saw
the carnivore brushed aside as he was almost upon her, and in the
instant she realized that no substanceless wraith could thus turn the
charge of a maddened lion with brute force greater than the brute's.

Tarzan, her Tarzan, lived!  A cry of unspeakable gladness broke from
her lips, only to die in terror as she saw the utter defenselessness of
her mate, and realized that the lion had recovered himself and was
turning upon Tarzan in mad lust for vengeance.

At the ape-man's feet lay the discarded rifle of the dead Abyssinian
whose mutilated corpse sprawled where Numa had abandoned it.  The quick
glance which had swept the ground for some weapon of defense discovered
it, and as the lion reared upon his hind legs to seize the rash
man-thing who had dared interpose its puny strength between Numa and
his prey, the heavy stock whirred through the air and splintered upon
the broad forehead.

Not as an ordinary mortal might strike a blow did Tarzan of the Apes
strike; but with the maddened frenzy of a wild beast backed by the
steel thews which his wild, arboreal boyhood had bequeathed him.  When
the blow ended the splintered stock was driven through the splintered
skull into the savage brain, and the heavy iron barrel was bent into a
rude V.

In the instant that the lion sank, lifeless, to the ground, Jane
Clayton threw herself into the eager arms of her husband.  For a brief
instant he strained her dear form to his breast, and then a glance
about him awakened the ape-man to the dangers which still surrounded
them.

Upon every hand the lions were still leaping upon new victims.
Fear-maddened horses still menaced them with their erratic bolting from
one side of the enclosure to the other.  Bullets from the guns of the
defenders who remained alive but added to the perils of their situation.

To remain was to court death.  Tarzan seized Jane Clayton and lifted
her to a broad shoulder.  The blacks who had witnessed his advent
looked on in amazement as they saw the naked giant leap easily into the
branches of the tree from whence he had dropped so uncannily upon the
scene, and vanish as he had come, bearing away their prisoner with him.

They were too well occupied in self-defense to attempt to halt him, nor
could they have done so other than by the wasting of a precious bullet
which might be needed the next instant to turn the charge of a savage
foe.

And so, unmolested, Tarzan passed from the camp of the Abyssinians,
from which the din of conflict followed him deep into the jungle until
distance gradually obliterated it entirely.

Back to the spot where he had left Werper went the ape-man, joy in his
heart now, where fear and sorrow had so recently reigned; and in his
mind a determination to forgive the Belgian and aid him in making good
his escape.  But when he came to the place, Werper was gone, and though
Tarzan called aloud many times he received no reply.  Convinced that
the man had purposely eluded him for reasons of his own, John Clayton
felt that he was under no obligations to expose his wife to further
danger and discomfort in the prosecution of a more thorough search for
the missing Belgian.

"He has acknowledged his guilt by his flight, Jane," he said.  "We will
let him go to lie in the bed that he has made for himself."

Straight as homing pigeons, the two made their way toward the ruin and
desolation that had once been the center of their happy lives, and
which was soon to be restored by the willing black hands of laughing
laborers, made happy again by the return of the master and mistress
whom they had mourned as dead.

Past the village of Achmet Zek their way led them, and there they found
but the charred remains of the palisade and the native huts, still
smoking, as mute evidence of the wrath and vengeance of a powerful
enemy.

"The Waziri," commented Tarzan with a grim smile.

"God bless them!" cried Jane Clayton.

"They cannot be far ahead of us," said Tarzan, "Basuli and the others.
The gold is gone and the jewels of Opar, Jane; but we have each other
and the Waziri--and we have love and loyalty and friendship.  And what
are gold and jewels to these?"

"If only poor Mugambi lived," she replied, "and those other brave
fellows who sacrificed their lives in vain endeavor to protect me!"

In the silence of mingled joy and sorrow they passed along through the
familiar jungle, and as the afternoon was waning there came faintly to
the ears of the ape-man the murmuring cadence of distant voices.

"We are nearing the Waziri, Jane," he said.  "I can hear them ahead of
us.  They are going into camp for the night, I imagine."

A half hour later the two came upon a horde of ebon warriors which
Basuli had collected for his war of vengeance upon the raiders.  With
them were the captured women of the tribe whom they had found in the
village of Achmet Zek, and tall, even among the giant Waziri, loomed a
familiar black form at the side of Basuli.  It was Mugambi, whom Jane
had thought dead amidst the charred ruins of the bungalow.

Ah, such a reunion!  Long into the night the dancing and the singing
and the laughter awoke the echoes of the somber wood.  Again and again
were the stories of their various adventures retold.  Again and once
again they fought their battles with savage beast and savage man, and
dawn was already breaking when Basuli, for the fortieth time, narrated
how he and a handful of his warriors had watched the battle for the
golden ingots which the Abyssinians of Abdul Mourak had waged against
the Arab raiders of Achmet Zek, and how, when the victors had ridden
away they had sneaked out of the river reeds and stolen away with the
precious ingots to hide them where no robber eye ever could discover
them.

Pieced out from the fragments of their various experiences with the
Belgian the truth concerning the malign activities of Albert Werper
became apparent.  Only Lady Greystoke found aught to praise in the
conduct of the man, and it was difficult even for her to reconcile his
many heinous acts with this one evidence of chivalry and honor.

"Deep in the soul of every man," said Tarzan, "must lurk the germ of
righteousness.  It was your own virtue, Jane, rather even than your
helplessness which awakened for an instant the latent decency of this
degraded man.  In that one act he retrieved himself, and when he is
called to face his Maker may it outweigh in the balance, all the sins
he has committed."

And Jane Clayton breathed a fervent, "Amen!"

Months had passed.  The labor of the Waziri and the gold of Opar had
rebuilt and refurnished the wasted homestead of the Greystokes.  Once
more the simple life of the great African farm went on as it had before
the coming of the Belgian and the Arab.  Forgotten were the sorrows and
dangers of yesterday.

For the first time in months Lord Greystoke felt that he might indulge
in a holiday, and so a great hunt was organized that the faithful
laborers might feast in celebration of the completion of their work.

In itself the hunt was a success, and ten days after its inauguration,
a well-laden safari took up its return march toward the Waziri plain.
Lord and Lady Greystoke with Basuli and Mugambi rode together at the
head of the column, laughing and talking together in that easy
familiarity which common interests and mutual respect breed between
honest and intelligent men of any races.

Jane Clayton's horse shied suddenly at an object half hidden in the
long grasses of an open space in the jungle.  Tarzan's keen eyes sought
quickly for an explanation of the animal's action.

"What have we here?" he cried, swinging from his saddle, and a moment
later the four were grouped about a human skull and a little litter of
whitened human bones.

Tarzan stooped and lifted a leathern pouch from the grisly relics of a
man.  The hard outlines of the contents brought an exclamation of
surprise to his lips.

"The jewels of Opar!" he cried, holding the pouch aloft, "and,"
pointing to the bones at his feet, "all that remains of Werper, the
Belgian."

Mugambi laughed.  "Look within, Bwana," he cried, "and you will see
what are the jewels of Opar--you will see what the Belgian gave his
life for," and the black laughed aloud.

"Why do you laugh?" asked Tarzan.

"Because," replied Mugambi, "I filled the Belgian's pouch with river
gravel before I escaped the camp of the Abyssinians whose prisoners we
were.  I left the Belgian only worthless stones, while I brought away
with me the jewels he had stolen from you.  That they were afterward
stolen from me while I slept in the jungle is my shame and my disgrace;
but at least the Belgian lost them--open his pouch and you will see."

Tarzan untied the thong which held the mouth of the leathern bag
closed, and permitted the contents to trickle slowly forth into his
open palm.  Mugambi's eyes went wide at the sight, and the others
uttered exclamations of surprise and incredulity, for from the rusty
and weatherworn pouch ran a stream of brilliant, scintillating gems.

"The jewels of Opar!" cried Tarzan.  "But how did Werper come by them
again?"

None could answer, for both Chulk and Werper were dead, and no other
knew.

"Poor devil!" said the ape-man, as he swung back into his saddle.
"Even in death he has made restitution--let his sins lie with his
bones."









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar, by 
Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARZAN AND THE JEWELS OF OPAR ***

***** This file should be named 92.txt or 92.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/92/

Produced by Judith Boss.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
