http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/09/nyregion/a-rich-plan-in-new-yorks-casino-race-is-no-sure-thing-for-cuomo.html

TUXEDO, N.Y. — As New York State considers a roulette wheel’s worth of
options for how it should enter the Las Vegas-style casino business,
none is as audacious as the proposal of a Malaysian conglomerate called
Genting Group.

Here, on an old landing strip carved out of a hillside in a dense forest
44 miles northwest of Manhattan, the company is seeking to build an
eye-popping complex with 1,000 hotel rooms and over-the-top
entertainment for every taste and season: theaters, restaurants, ski
runs, formal gardens, zip lines — even a refurbished Renaissance
village.

Its proposal is far and away the richest. And unlike its rivals, who are
either relatively untested or groaning under enormous debt, Genting is
working with $6 billion in cash and 40 years of experience, including
over two decades in the United States.
Continue reading the main story
Related Coverage

    David Climans of CGL Architects Inc. helped to prepare a
presentation by Tioga Downs at a meeting of the New York Gaming Facility
Location Board in Albany on Monday.
    Gambling Developers Make Presentations in Albany as They Vie for
LicensesSEPT. 8, 2014
    Gov. Chris Christie at a meeting in Atlantic City on Monday,
convened to discuss the city’s worsening problems.
    Christie Unilaterally Lifts Sports-Betting ProhibitionSEPT. 8, 2014
    A patron on Thursday at Empire City Casino at Yonkers Raceway, which
has seen a 4 percent drop in winnings this year.
    The Buy-In: Albany Doubling Down as Casino Boom FadesAUG. 10, 2014

And the spot it has chosen, an easy drive from the George Washington
Bridge, puts it the closest of any proposed casino to the most
well-heeled and tightly packed reservoir of potential customers in the
country: New York City, with 8.4 million residents and 50 million
tourists a year.
Continue reading the main story
The Buy-In

Articles in this series are examining the ramifications of New York
State’s embrace of casino gambling.

All of which suggests its proposal could do more than any rival’s to
create jobs, generate upstate taxes, capture the imaginations of bettors
who would otherwise burn through their bankrolls in other states — and
quickly become the dominant force in the already crowded East Coast
gambling market.

“How can you say no to that?” said Chad C. Beynon, a gambling analyst at
Macquarie Securities Group.

“How can you honestly pick someone else?”

Yet for the officials Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo has put in charge of choosing
up to four upstate winners from 16 applicants, no aspect of the
decision-making will be as fraught as whether to let Genting open a
casino in Tuxedo.

Conservationists are in revolt over the damage they fear such a huge
gambling mecca would do to the pristine, publicly owned woodlands
surrounding the Tuxedo site, in Orange County. Officials an hour to the
north, in the Catskills, are warning that a casino so much closer to the
city would divert all the gamblers they had hoped to attract, dooming
their ailing region’s chances of economic revival.

Awarding a license to Genting, whose relationship with the governor has
been up and down, would also expose Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat seeking
re-election this year, to criticism on grounds of fairness. The company
already operates a crowded slot-machine parlor next to the faded
Aqueduct racetrack in Queens — which, unlikely as it may seem, has
quietly become the busiest casino location in North America. Adding the
Tuxedo site would only consolidate its commanding position atop New
York’s gambling industry, competitors say.

“How many licenses are they going to give to one company?” said Jeffrey
Gural, a rival developer.

To overcome those obstacles, Genting has tried to make its offer so rich
that New York State will be unable to refuse it.

The company has committed to invest at least $1.5 billion in its
development. It has offered the state government a lump-sum license fee
of $450 million — more than six times the $70 million requirement. It
has promised to build a $30 million highway interchange to bring
visitors to its front doors. It says it will generate $400 million a
year in state and local taxes, much of it for education, and has
proposed to turn over another 6 percent of its slot-machine revenue — a
projected $30 million a year — to benefit New York’s state parks.
Photo
A scale model of the project in the project office. Credit Robert
Stolarik for The New York Times

Genting’s venture, like New York’s entire casino strategy, faces stiff
headwinds. The gambling market in the Northeast is already approaching
saturation, but is growing only more competitive: Atlantic City casinos
are closing, but New Jersey is considering allowing slot machines in the
Meadowlands or Jersey City, a few miles from Manhattan.

So a $1.5 billion investment in Tuxedo could be impossible to recoup
quickly. And there is a ticking clock: The law authorizing new upstate
casinos also allows three more to open in New York City and its suburbs
after another seven years — at which point it gamblers would not have to
head upstate at all.

“The winner may be the loser from an investment standpoint,” said Mr.
Beynon, the analyst.

Genting acknowledges the hostile environment, but contends that it is
uniquely capable of flourishing in New York in spite of it, thanks to an
international database of 12 million customers, including more Asians
than any rival: It runs the busiest casinos in Malaysia and the
Philippines and a hugely profitable one in Singapore.

“The magic is that New York’s already an attraction,” said Christian
Goode, a Genting executive. “Asian customers are already coming here for
shopping, to take their kids to school, or for a holiday. Our
destination will complement those trips: You can still enjoy the
museums, the shopping, the restaurants in New York City — and go to a
five-star-plus resort with a world-class spa, a ski slope and hiking.
We’ll provide everything from shuttle buses to limo service.”

A Gold Mine in Queens

The highest-grossing casino in America is not in the Nevada desert, on
the beaches of Atlantic City or in the woods of eastern Connecticut. It
is in a hardscrabble neighborhood near Kennedy International Airport in
Queens, where in 2011, Genting opened Resorts World New York alongside
Aqueduct’s rusty grandstand.

Step inside the casino’s soaring lobby, with its three-story chandelier
and two shiny Cadillacs advertising the latest giveaway, and the audible
hum-ding-buzz of electronic slot, roulette and baccarat machines signals
the real action, just up the escalators.

At 3 p.m. on a steamy New York weekday, 4,000 men and women have parked
themselves in air-conditioned comfort in front of those video screens,
betting — and mostly losing — as much as $50 a game. Their numbers
double or triple by nightfall.
Continue reading the main story
Tuxedo

20 MILES

NEW YORK

87

Monticello

Montgomery

84

Tuxedo

NEW JERSEY

New York City

Aqueduct

Racetrack

“This place is making crazy money,” said a young emergency-room nurse
from Mill Basin, Brooklyn, who declined to give his name but said he
came twice a week, spending as much as $600 a trip. “I won $2,000 once.
Then you put it right back.”

Resorts World generated $792 million in revenue (and more than half a
billion dollars in taxes) last year, all from electronic machines. That
is more money from gambling than at the Bellagio, or the Venetian, or
any other full-fledged casino in America in 2013, said Robert J. Shore,
a gambling analyst at Union Gaming Group, whose consulting arm does work
for Genting.

“Amazing numbers,” he said.

It was also the culmination of an effort decades long to gain a major
foothold in the United States.

Genting had its origins in the construction of a mountaintop resort,
casino, theme park and shopping mall outside Kuala Lumpur beginning in
the 1960s and ’70s. Today it is the largest casino operator in Britain,
not just in Asia, and has interests in energy, biotechnology and cruise
lines.

It surfaced in the United States in 1990, when it agreed to finance the
Pequot tribe’s construction of what became Foxwoods in eastern
Connecticut — the first of several investments in Native American
casinos.

Genting’s American forays did not always succeed, but they grew
increasingly bold.

In 2011, it made a $500 million bet that Florida would authorize
mega-casinos, scooping up a 30-acre site on Biscayne Bay in Miami. It
hired two dozen lobbying and public-relations firms, donated $600,000 to
politicians and promised to subsidize 12 new flights from Asia. But
Disney World objected, and Genting’s too-much, too-fast approach scared
off the elected officials whose support it needed, analysts said.

Genting had to settle for a casino complex a 90-minute boat ride away in
the Bahamas, where it opened in 2013.
Photo
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s proposal for a convention center, a joint venture
with Genting, foundered. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times

The company made an even bigger play on the Las Vegas Strip last year,
when it paid $350 million for the site of the old Stardust casino, where
it says it is building a $4 billion Chinese-themed resort.

But nothing would vault Genting into the forefront of the industry like
winning the opportunity to run a full-fledged casino a short drive from
New York City.

Embarrassment to Governor

For the Cuomo administration to award Genting a casino license in
Tuxedo, it would have to look past its own complicated relationship with
the company.

By the time the governor was elected in 2010, Genting had already been
awarded the state franchise for what became Resorts World New York.

A year later, Mr. Cuomo strongly embraced the company and its
aspirations. He came out in favor of a plan to legalize full-scale
resort casinos outside tribal lands as an economic-development strategy.
And he made an ambitious proposal for a joint venture with Genting to
build a new convention center at Aqueduct, allowing the state to close
the Javits Center and redevelop a large stretch of Manhattan waterfront.

But the joint venture became a debacle and ruined the company’s
relationship with Mr. Cuomo.

The Manhattan-centric hotel industry, it turned out, opposed a Queens
convention complex. There was no fast way for conventioneers to get to
the site from Manhattan. And Genting was demanding assurances that its
investment would be protected from a rival casino’s opening elsewhere in
the city.

Months later, the proposal was dead, and an embarrassment: Genting
executives said they had not expected Mr. Cuomo to mention what they saw
as only an idea, while the administration accused the Malaysian company
of reneging on what it called a “done deal.”
Photo
On the slot machine floor at the Resorts World casino in Queens. Opened
by Genting Group in 2011, it is the highest-grossing casino in America.
Credit Marcus Yam for The New York Times
Continue reading the main story
Recent Comments
EricR
11 minutes ago

The solution is simple and obvious. Let Gentling buy the LG property on
the Palisades and put their development there. The price? Pay for...
kanecamp
12 minutes ago

Hmmm....interesting that this story is appearing on Primary day. This
casino is a horrible plan, no matter how you look at it.
Kat
12 minutes ago

The photograph makes me weep. This gorgeous environment and all we
humans can do is place some money-making atrocity in the middle of
it....

    See All Comments
    Write a comment

Then, news articles in 2012 revealed that the joint-venture idea had
been hatched at a fund-raiser for Mr. Cuomo — and that Genting and a
trade group it founded had donated $2.4 million to a political group
closely allied with the governor.

Genting quickly became persona non grata in Mr. Cuomo’s office. Even
this year, it took the intervention of Peter Ward, the powerful
hotel-workers’ union leader, to get the company a meeting with the
governor’s aides in June to renegotiate its deal.

Given that history, Genting is taking no chances in pursuing a casino
license in Tuxedo.

Its $1.5 billion proposal for a resort employing 4,000 people,
surrounded on three sides by Sterling Forest, is $500 million bigger
than the second-largest bid out of the 16 received by the New York State
Gaming Commission.

That $1 billion bid — in another Orange County municipality, Montgomery,
to the north of the forest — is also backed by Genting.

Like a gambler covering a craps table with chips, Genting’s chairman,
Kok Thay Lim, is also involved through a family trust in a third
proposal: for a $750 million casino in the Catskills, roughly 90 miles
northwest of New York City.

Catskill officials have feared that the granting of a casino license in
Tuxedo, Montgomery or elsewhere in Orange County would wreck their
region’s hopes of attracting a viable casino resort, and the
sorely-needed jobs and taxes it would bring.

But Mr. Goode said the 238-acre Tuxedo project would deliver the
greatest economic impact and the best chance for success.

Environmental Concerns
Photo
Residents and environmentalists from Tuxedo, N.Y., holding a meeting
opposing the proposed casino in Sterling Forest: From left, Roger
Friedman, Kristy Apostolides, Mary Yrizarri and John Yrizarri. Credit
Robert Stolarik for The New York Times

At its promotional office next to the Tuxedo public library, a video
also promises that residents will see only “minimal impact” on Sterling
Forest.

Environmentalists say otherwise.

“I think it’ll be the undoing of a lot of our work,” said Mary Yrizarri,
82, widely regarded as the matriarch of the decades-long movement to
turn what was once a privately owned forest, where developers wanted to
build housing, into a 22,000-acre state park instead.

Ms. Yrizarri and her husband, John, an illustrator and naturalist, are
working with the Sterling Forest Partnership, which has filed a lawsuit
claiming that the town improperly rezoned the area for a casino.

The existing Tuxedo Ridge ski center and Renaissance Faire are minor
nuisances, Ms. Yrizarri said in an interview at her cottage five minutes
from the proposed casino site. A resort that promises to draw 19,000
people a day, every day, is another matter.

The National Resources Defense Council and the New Jersey Sierra Club
have come out against the project, saying it threatens the watershed
that supplies drinking water for both states.

“It cannot help but radiate into the forest in ways that’ll hurt the
wildlife,” said Roger Friedman, president of the Sterling Forest
Partnership.

Mr. Goode said Genting would make every effort to mitigate those
impacts, knowing that the forest’s natural beauty was part of the
attraction.

But a battle could prove bruising for the company and for the governor.

Gov. George E. Pataki, a Republican, earned accolades from
conservationists for having New York State putting up most of the money
to buy Sterling Forest. Mr. Cuomo, whose environmental record has been
mixed, now risks alienating the same groups.

“It took $100 million to buy Sterling Forest,” said Carol Ash, a
longtime conservationist who helped Mr. Pataki acquire the land. “It’s
inappropriate to now say that they’re going to put the equivalent of a
new city in the middle of the forest.”
