http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/09/technology/google-is-target-of-european-backlash-on-us-tech-dominance.html

BRUSSELS — A top German official called for Google to be broken up. A
French minister pronounced the company a threat to his country’s
sovereignty. A European publishing executive likened it to a Wagnerian
dragon.

Across Europe, Google has been under fire, reflecting the broader
challenges facing American technology companies. Google, fairly or not,
has become a glaring proxy for criticism of an intrusive American
government and concern over America’s unmatched technology dominance.

On Monday, things grew worse. Regulators pushed the company to give up
more in an antitrust settlement — demanding that Google make additional
changes to its secret sauce, the search algorithm.
Continue reading the main story
Related Coverage

    One of the deleted links was to a BBC blog post in 2007 about E.
Stanley O’Neal, the former chief of Merrill Lynch.
    Google Starts Erasing Links for Searches in EuropeJULY 3, 2014
    The case began in 2009 when Mario Costeja, a lawyer in Spain,
objected that entering his name in Google’s search engine led to legal
notices that he said were no longer relevant.
    European Court Lets Users Erase Records on WebMAY 13, 2014
    Joaquín Almunia, the European Union’s competition commissioner, who
leaves his post later this year, has made the antitrust settlement with
Google a top priority.
    Google Settles Its European Antitrust Case; Critics RemainFEB. 5,
2014

When Google initially settled with regulators in February, it emerged
largely unscathed, agreeing to make modest adjustments to its search
formula and avoiding a fine. Now, the deal is in jeopardy. If Google
does not acquiesce, regulators could toss out the settlement and bring
formal charges, which could prompt billions of dollars in penalties and
major changes to its operations.
Continue reading the main story
Notable Moments in Google’s E.U. Antitrust Case
November 2010

Europe opens a formal antitrust investigation into accusations that
Google has abused its dominance in online search, exposing the company’s
zealously guarded technology to unwelcome scrutiny.

The backlash in Europe extends beyond Google. Taxi drivers from London
to Madrid have demonstrated against Uber, the American ride-sharing
company that was recently banned in Germany. Apple and Amazon are being
investigated over their tax policies, and regulators are scrutinizing
Facebook’s proposed acquisition of WhatsApp, a messaging app.

Google, with its broad reach, is arguably facing the most pressure.

Accusations are mounting that Google unfairly exploits its dominant
position in search, giving a competitive edge to its growing stable of
businesses, like YouTube videos, its Google Play app store and its news
alerts.

A landmark European court ruling this year forced search providers to
give the public greater sway in purging links to personal information.
Its Street View cars, dispatched to scoop up data, have brought fines in
France, Germany and Italy.

“We are afraid of Google,” wrote Mathias Döpfner, chief executive of
Axel Springer, a German publishing giant, in an open letter to Eric
Schmidt, Google’s executive chairman. “I must state this very clearly
and frankly, because few of my colleagues dare do so publicly.”

The influence of Mr. Döpfner, who has rallied a group of publishers
against the company, has risen after he played a crucial role in winning
German support for Jean-Claude Juncker, the next head of the European
Commission.

Google has not been idle. While the company has stressed its efforts to
negotiate with European regulators, it has also resorted to more
familiar tactics.

Since 2010, the company has tripled its lobbying budget in Brussels to
as much as $2 million annually, according to public records. Google has
hired political insiders, including Antoine Aubert, a former policy
manager in one of the European Commission’s ministries. The company has
also tapped at least four outside firms to bolster its own staff of
seven registered lobbyists, records show. And Google has doubled the
number of outside groups it has joined to advance its interests, with
some, like the European Privacy Association, drawing criticism for a
lack of transparency.

“We continue to work with the E.C. to resolve the concerns they have
raised,” the company said in an emailed statement about the antitrust
settlement, referring to the European Commission. Over the weekend, Mr.
Schmidt in a lengthy statement responded to criticisms made by European
publishers, saying it is not true that “we are promoting our own
products at the expense of the competition.”

Much has changed since Google was founded in the late 1990s. It was once
viewed as an idealistic start-up whose credo was “Don’t Be Evil.”

Now, it is under attack around the globe. Over the last year, while its
search engine business was being shut off by the Chinese government, its
employee buses were assailed in the Bay Area as symbols of inequality
and its Google Glass was drawing fire from privacy advocates.

“They’re no longer seen as innocent geeks,” said Thomas Tindemans, the
chief executive of Hill & Knowlton Strategies in Brussels.

Perceptions in Europe have been gradually changing over Google’s
dominance. The company commands about two-thirds of the United States
search market, according to comScore, but close to 90 percent in Europe,
excluding Russia.

Anger over mass data collection by the American government has only
amplified the concerns. Jérémie Zimmerman, a co-founder of the French
Internet activist group La Quadrature du Net, said that when people told
him now that they worked for Google, he says, “How do you like working
for the N.S.A.,” referring to the National Security Agency.
Continue reading the main story
Recent Comments
DaveG
20 minutes ago

Google’s corporate motto, “Don’t Be Evil”, sounds like Orwellian
Doublespeak to me, with mega-multinational Google’s actual workings
being...
COH
22 minutes ago

I am sorry but I have complaints about Google too but until there is a
viable competitor you do not have an injured party re. antitrust. ...
fact or friction?
22 minutes ago

If only the US government took the same stance in regard to monopolies
and antitrust. The EU arguably cares more about the interests of the...

    See All Comments
    Write a comment

“Many users were lured by the convenience and comfort of the services,”
he said, but he added that the revelations by the former N.S.A.
contractor Edward J. Snowden revealed that Google was part of a “massive
breach of our security, of our data and of our sovereignty.”

Google, for its part, has denied being complicit in the spying and said
it was taking steps to make it much more difficult for spy agencies to
breach its systems.

On another antitrust front, regulators have begun a preliminary
investigation of the company’s Android operating system for cellphones
and other mobile devices. They are examining many complaints from
competitors like Aptoide, a Portuguese app store provider that says
Google’s search results favor the Google Play app store. Other
complaints have come from an association of photo libraries and a
telecom company, claiming that Google skews search results.

Digital privacy legislation is also advancing in Parliament. The
legislation has accumulated more than 4,000 amendments, a record. Among
the main proposals are restrictions on how companies like Google use
personal data and requirements that they check with European officials
before they comply with American subpoenas.

“Google was an interesting start-up at the beginning and a helpful
website, but that has dramatically changed,” said Jan Philipp Albrecht,
a member of the Green Party who has been the leading legislator
shepherding through the legislation. “For politicians in Europe, it’s
clear they have to act and regulate the way Google dominates the
market.”

Trouble is stirring at the country level, too. In Germany, publishers
are fighting in court over compensation for the “snippets of text” that
appear with Google News updates.

“Taken together, all these issues point to the pressing need for
E.U.-wide common approaches to the challenges posed by Google and other
players in the digital era,” Joaquín Almunia, Europe’s competition
regulator, said in a speech this summer. “Their centrality for Europe’s
economy and their pervasive presence in the lives of the vast majority
of our fellow citizens are turning this into one of the defining domains
of E.U. policy making.”

Google’s competitors have created a cottage industry dedicated to
bashing the company. Axel Springer and a number of other French and
German companies banded together to form a group called the Open
Internet Project, whose grandiose “Paris Declaration of May 15, 2014,”
said “European consumers and digital entrepreneurs demand ban of
Google’s manipulative favoring of own services and content.”

Then there is Microsoft, Google’s longtime nemesis, which spends three
times as much in Europe on lobbying and similar efforts. ICOMP, a
Microsoft-backed group, has long targeted Google.

“Google is clearly in the cross hairs,” said David Wood, a London-based
partner at Gibson, Dunn, one of Microsoft’s law firms, and legal counsel
at ICOMP. “A lot of the aura has faded, and the shine has come off, and
people don’t think they’re the good guy anymore.”
