http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/09/world/europe/ukraines-presidential-palace-is-not-yet-an-emblem-of-change.html?_r=0

VYSHOROD, Ukraine — It was supposed to become a Museum of Corruption, a
triumphant trophy of Ukraine’s February revolution and a monument to its
new leaders’ determination to uproot the lawlessness and avarice that
blighted this country’s first two decades as an independent nation.

More than six months after protesters drove President Viktor F.
Yanukovych from power, however, his lavish estate on a forested bluff
north of Kiev, the capital, displays how difficult it is to bring real
change. It also stands as a dark warning that Ukraine’s troubles reach
far beyond the war zone in the east of the country.

“This was the main symbol of our revolution, our Bastille,” said Yuriy
Syrotiuk, a member of the Ukrainian Parliament who, a day after Mr.
Yanukovych fled Kiev on Feb. 21, drafted legislation that ordered the
gigantic property transferred to the Ukrainian state.
Continue reading the main story
Related Coverage

    FRAGILE CEASE-FIRE A brother and sister died in shelling near
Mariupol; Europe endorsed sanctions against Russia.
    Brushing Off Threats, E.U. Votes to Toughen Its Sanctions on
RussiaSEPT. 8, 2014
    A basement bunker at a technical college in Yasinovataya, Ukraine,
doubled as a bedroom.
    Ukraine and Russia Face Gaps in a Truce and a Chasm on the
IssuesSEPT. 7, 2014
    Militiamen who oppose the separatists gathered on the outskirts of
Mariupol, Ukraine, after a cease-fire was announced Friday.
    Ukraine Deal Imposes Truce Putin DevisedSEPT. 5, 2014

But instead of joining the former Paris prison as an emblem of a
decisive break with the past, Mr. Yanukovych’s palatial residence,
tennis courts, golf course, personal zoo, helicopter pad and acres of
landscaped gardens are now “a symbol of our state’s inability to
function normally,” Mr. Syrotiuk said.
Photo
It costs about a dollar to enter the estate of former President Viktor
F. Yanukovych, with guided tours of its villa available for $15. Credit
Uriel Sinai for The New York Times

His draft legislation, swiftly adopted into law on Feb. 24, mandated
that Mr. Yanukovych’s estate, a property of almost Versailles-like scale
and excess, be taken over by the state within 10 days. That still has
not happened.

That plan sank in a swamp of legal confusion and squabbling over control
of Mr. Yanukovych’s opulent hideaway and its contents, estimated to be
worth over $1 billion in all, including gold bathroom fixtures, a white
Steinway grand piano and a menagerie of exotic birds, deer and other
animals.

In the confusion, the whole lot has fallen under the control of Denys
Tarachkotelyk, a burly former businessman and now the self-declared
“commandant” of a 350-acre estate, nearly twice the size of Camp David.
The boss of a small transport company who supported protests in Kiev’s
Independence Square, he arrived at Mr. Yanukovych’s Mezhyhirya residence
on the morning after the president fled and somehow managed to
outmaneuver rival revolutionary avengers to gain control of the entire
property.

Supported by a group of former protesters from Independence Square and
now by volunteer fighters back from the war in eastern Ukraine, he has
kept would-be looters and vandals away and, arguing that corrupt
bureaucrats only want to enrich themselves, has steadfastly resisted
government orders that he hand over his domain to a state-owned
agricultural company.

“Lots of people want to take it away. They are playing the same old
game,” said Mr. Tarachkotelyk, speaking on the veranda of his office, a
luxury guest villa known as “Putin’s House” because of rumors that
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia stayed there once during a visit
to Kiev. “Yanukovych has gone, but an army of bureaucrats stayed behind.
All they think about is how to steal for themselves.”

But while fuming against greedy, inept politicians and officials, Mr.
Tarachkotelyk has himself been besieged by accusations of thievery and
incompetence.

“Who is this person? He is a nobody,” said Mr. Syrotiuk, the legislator.
He described Mr. Tarachkotelyk as a “numbskull” and said his principal
goal was to keep control of the cash flow generated by ticket sales to
visitors.

On one point, however, all sides in the feud agree: Ukraine’s February
revolution is far from finished and needs to deliver on its promise of a
clear, fresh start to avoid going the way of the so-called Orange
Revolution of 2004 that generated high hopes and then fizzled in a
morass of infighting and corruption.
Photo
The estate, north of Kiev, featured a menagerie of exotic birds, deer
and other animals, as well as a sculpture of a horse. Credit Jeff J
Mitchell/Getty Images

The bloody military campaign in eastern Ukraine against pro-Russian
rebels, now in abeyance after a cease-fire agreement, has helped to keep
frustration with Ukraine’s new leaders and their tycoon backers in
check. And even their most fervent critics acknowledge that President
Petro O. Poroshenko, a wealthy businessman elected in May, has avoided
the larceny associated with Mr. Yanukovych.

But alarm bubbled to the surface last month when Tetyana Chornovol, a
prominent supporter of the protests in the Kiev plaza also known as
Maidan, announced that she was resigning as head of a new
anti-corruption agency. She complained that her efforts to fight graft
had drowned in a “bureaucratic swamp.”

“Maidan has not purged us. It has just become the beginning of a
difficult path,” Ms. Chornovol, whose husband was killed recently in
fighting against rebels near Donetsk, wrote in an anguished article
explaining her departure. “Our country is simply so sick, it lacks
patriotism and you can hardly expect better things from the government
right now. Yes, the government is ill with corruption, political
intrigues and God knows with what else.”

The economy minister, Pavlo Sheremeta, has also jumped ship, frustrated
with the slow pace of economic reform. He said he was fed up with
bureaucratic obstacles and having to “fight against yesterday’s system.”

Many Ukrainians blame Mr. Putin, saying his principal objective is
keeping Ukraine in an uproar and so preventing its new leaders from
meeting the hopes of change raised by the Maidan protests.

But another problem is that just about everyone other than the
pro-Russian gunmen in the east proclaim themselves guardians of the
revolution, a role that can provide easy cover for narrow personal
ambitions.

Mr. Tarachkotelyk says he has used money collected from ticket sales not
only to pay the salaries of 145 staff members but also to buy helmets,
bulletproof vests and other equipment for soldiers fighting the
separatists. He also boasts of buying food to feed scores of fighters
now recuperating on the estate as well as around 80 refugees from
Donetsk and other parts of the war zone.

It costs just over a dollar to enter the estate but around $15 for a
guided tour of Mr. Yanukovych’s palatial villa. The number of visitors
has fallen sharply since February, when hundreds of thousands rushed to
gawk at the former president’s excess, but tens of thousands still visit
on weekends, marveling at Mr. Yanukovych’s execrable taste and
generating substantial ticket receipts for Mr. Tarachkotelyk and his
men.
Photo
Visitors wandered around the Mezhyhirya residence on Feb. 26, just days
after Mr. Yanukovych fled Kiev. Legislation was quickly drafted to
return the property to the state. Credit Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images

More money comes in from food stalls and tour operators, but how much
exactly, and where it goes, are unclear, as Mr. Tarachkotelyk sees no
need for outside auditors. The government, he said, has no right to
inspect his accounts. “We account for ourselves before society,” he
said.
Continue reading the main story
Recent Comments
sallerup
5 minutes ago

It is just as outrageous as Joan Rivers lived. At least Joan Rivers did
not steal her wealth. What is the matter with people and money you...
Jon Harrison
6 minutes ago

This article makes quite plain what I have said here and elsewhere many
times: Ukraine is a failed state. It has failed most if not all of...
penna095
7 minutes ago

Wolves will attack those in the herd who are injured, ill, or weakened
by age.Putin knows about Russian wolves.9/9/14 7:40am #05

    See All Comments
    Write a comment

He dismissed as lies a swarm of allegations surrounding his management.
These include reports in the Ukrainian news media that he or his
supporters stole a big loaf-shaped bar of gold left by Mr. Yanukovych in
his study and pocketed money that should have gone to buy food for
hungry animals in the former president’s zoo.

The animals now all look well fed, and Mr. Tarachkotelyk says he is the
victim of a defamation campaign by those who want to seize the
presidential estate for their own purposes. The gold bar, he added,
never existed.

While getting a glimpse of Mr. Yanukovych’s over-the-top extravagance,
visitors to his villa are also told of how his successors are
squandering the fruits of the revolution. “Old bandits have been
replaced by new bandits,” said Petro Oleinik, a tour guide there.

Defenders of the new leaders counsel patience. “They think everything
can change in a day,” said Oleg Kuyavisky, an adviser to Vitali
Klitschko, the former boxing champion who is now the mayor of Kiev. “But
we need to change the whole system and that takes time.”

The struggle for control of Mr. Yanukovych’s estate, however, shows just
how hard that will be in a country where who really owns what is often
hidden in an opaque fog. Mr. Yanukovych and his cronies are gone, but
government bureaucracies remain stacked with underpaid officials shaped
by their corrupt ways.

When Parliament first passed the law demanding that the state take over
Mr. Yanukovych’s property, recalled Mr. Syrotiuk, the lawmaker who
drafted it, it seemed an easy way to strike a symbolic and real blow
against the corruption of the old government. “Everyone agreed we had to
take it away, that this was not clean property,” he said.

Doing this legally, however, quickly ran into problems as most of the
estate was not technically owned by Mr. Yanukovych but by a private
company that, on paper, had nothing to do with him. All Mr. Yanukovych
formally owned was his palatial residence, a grotesque Finnish-built
folly whose jumble of Italian, Gothic, Slavic and other styles is now
mockingly known as “Donetsk Rococo,” a reference to the former
president’s war-ravaged home city.

A court finally ruled in June that the state had a right to take the
whole property, declaring that a series of murky deals transferring the
Soviet-era compound to private ownership were all illegal. But efforts
to oust Mr. Tarachkotelyk have all come to nothing.

The prosecutor general meanwhile has declared the entire property
“material evidence” in a criminal investigation into Mr. Yanukovych,
which means that nobody is supposed to touch it until Mr. Yanukovych
comes to trial, an unlikely prospect as he has been hiding in Russia
since late February.

“This is all just a political game by people who want to take away
Mezhyhirya for themselves,” Mr. Tarachkotelyk said. “We are protecting
it for the people.”
